=== Page 1 ===
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TRANSPORTATION ELECTRIFICATION, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH 2026 1
LLMBO-MO: Large Language Model-Augmented
Multi-Objective Bayesian Optimization
for Battery Fast-Charging Protocol Design
First A. Author, Member, IEEE, Second B. Author, Fellow, OSA, and Third C. Author, Life Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Fast-charging protocol design is an expensive con- in one design campaign. Bayesian optimization (BO) is well
strained multiobjective problem that must balance charging suited to this regime because it uses a probabilistic surrogate
time, thermal stress, and a degradation indicator. Conventional
and an acquisition rule to allocate expensive evaluations [4].
Bayesian optimization (BO) is sample efficient, but its cold-
Closed-loop cell studies and simulation-based charging design
start decisions depend on few task-specific observations and
generic statistical priors. This paper presents LLMBO-MO, a have demonstrated substantial reductions in the required search
multiobjective BO framework that treats large-language-model budget [5]–[7]. Multiobjective extensions further expose the
(LLM) output as a fallible preference prior rather than as an trade-off surface instead of collapsing user preferences into
objective observation or a final decision. The LLM first supports
one permanently fixed objective [8].
a diverse, constraint-screened warm start and then supplies
weight-conditioned point or region preferences during early A remaining difficulty is BO’s cold start. Before enough
optimization. Simulator evaluations alone update the Gaussian- task-specific observations have accumulated, the surrogate and
process surrogate, while a posterior-covariance mean lift gives acquisition function are strongly shaped by a small initial design
valid guidance bounded influence at acquisition time; missing
and generic statistical priors. Structured battery knowledge can
or invalid guidance reverts to standard expected improvement.
improve this regime, as illustrated by recent model-prior-guided
Augmented Tchebycheff scalarization distributes the search across
the three objectives. Under matched 56-evaluation budgets on charging optimization [9], but constructing a reliable prior
coupled electrochemical–thermal simulators with a protocol-level model for every cell and operating condition is itself demanding.
degradation proxy, LLMBO-MO improves final hypervolume LLM-assisted BO offers a complementary interface: recent
over ParEGO by 9.2% in a representative Chen2020 case and
methods use large language models (LLMs) for warm starting,
by 17.8% on average across five Ecker2015 seeds. In the latter
region preference, or low-fidelity prediction [10]–[12]. For
comparison, the hypervolume standard deviation decreases from
0.0116 to 0.0024. Ablations show positive mean contributions safety-constrained battery design, however, an LLM response is
from both LLM touchpoints, with their combination attaining neither a calibrated measurement nor a guarantee of feasibility.
the highest mean hypervolume. The evidence is simulation-based The technical challenge is thus to use its contextual guidance
and supports guarded LLM guidance as a promising route to
without allowing unverified text-derived values to corrupt the
more sample-efficient Pareto search.
surrogate or bypass numerical constraint handling.
Index Terms—Battery charging, Bayesian optimization, large
This paper addresses that challenge with LLMBO-MO, a
language models, lithium-ion batteries, multiobjective optimization.
guarded LLM-augmented multiobjective BO framework for
three-stage fast-charging protocol design. Its core principle is to
treat LLM output as a fallible preference prior. At initialization,
I. INTRODUCTION
repaired and screened LLM proposals contribute to a diverse
Lithium-ion batteries are central to electric vehicles and warm-start portfolio. During an early guidance window, weight-
other high-power energy-storage systems because of their high conditioned point or region preferences induce a posterior-
energy density and long cycle life [1]. Fast charging improves covariance mean lift used only for acquisition. Only simulator
vehicle availability, but increasing the charge rate can intensify outputs enter the Gaussian-process (GP) training database;
heat generation, lithium plating, and solid-electrolyte-interphase malformed, infeasible, or unusable guidance has zero influence
growth [2], [3]. Charging-protocol design is therefore not a and the optimizer reverts to ordinary expected improvement
single speed-maximization task: charging time, thermal stress, (EI). Augmented Tchebycheff scalarization with Riesz-energy
and degradation must be balanced under voltage, temperature, weight vectors distributes the search across the three objectives.
and state-of-charge (SOC) constraints. The main contributions are as follows:
The central computational difficulty is the scarcity of
1) A guarded two-touchpoint architecture is formulated
informative protocol evaluations. Physical cycling tests are slow
for constrained battery MOBO. The LLM advises ini-
and costly, and even reduced-order electrochemical–thermal
tialization and early regional search, while simulator
simulations limit the number of protocols that can be assessed
observations, the GP surrogate, and EI retain authority
Manuscript received Month Day, Year; revised Month Day, Year. This work over every evaluated protocol.
was supported in part by ... 2) A battery-aware warm-start portfolio and a weight-
First A. Author is with the ...
conditioned posterior-covariance region lift are integrated
Second B. Author is with the ...
Third C. Author is with the ... with explicit parsing, feasibility repair, bounded coupling,

=== Page 2 ===
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TRANSPORTATION ELECTRIFICATION, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH 2026 2
and reversion to plain EI. This design prevents unevalu- TABLE I
ated LLM outputs from becoming surrogate targets. DECISION VARIABLES AND BOUNDS
3) The framework is evaluated under matched 56-simulation
Variable Symbol Bounds Unit
budgets on two SPMe parameterizations. It improves final
hypervolume over ParEGO by 9.2% in a representative Stage-1 current I1 [2.0,6.0] A
Stage-2 current I2 [2.0,5.0] A
Chen2020 case and by 17.8% over five Ecker2015 seeds;
Stage-3 current I3 [2.0,3.0] A
four-group ablations isolate the mean contribution of Stage-1 SOC width ∆s1 [0.10,0.40] –
both LLM touchpoints. Stage-2 SOC width ∆s2 [0.10,0.30] –
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
positions the work against battery fast-charging optimization,
expensive MOBO, and LLM-assisted BO. Section III formu- in data-sparse BO [10]. LGBO introduced point and region
lates the constrained protocol-design problem, and Section IV preferences that alter a surrogate mean while preserving its
describes the common simulation model. Section V presents posterior covariance [11]. LABO takes a multi-fidelity view,
LLMBO-MO. Section VI reports the evaluation, ablations, and combining inexpensive LLM predictions with real-fidelity
scope limitations, and Section VII concludes the paper. observations through discrepancy modeling and a gating
rule [12]. LLMBO-MO is closest to the preference-guided
II. RELATED WORK line but differs in the authority assigned to language-model
output: it neither inserts LLM predictions as objective values
A. Fast-Charging Protocol Optimization
nor lets the LLM choose the final evaluation. Its contribution
Fast-charging design spans model-based optimal control,
is a battery-specific, constraint-screened interface that bounds
data-driven search, and closed-loop experimentation. Attia et
LLM influence to initial portfolio construction and an early
al. combined early lifetime prediction with BO in physical-
acquisition-time mean lift.
cell experiments [5]. Jiang and co-workers studied minimum-
time charging, acquisition choices, protocol dimensionality,
and operational constraints [6], [7], while Wang and Jiang
III. PROBLEM FORMULATION
used Chebyshev decomposition for constrained multiobjective
charging design [8]. More recent work combines BO with A. Constrained Multiobjective Charging Objective
mesh-adaptive search for faster convergence [13], uses early-
life prediction with noisy expected hypervolume improvement The design variable is a multi-stage constant-current charging
for multiple charging objectives [14], or constructs a semi- protocol θ. The optimization problem is formulated as a
empirical aging-model prior [9]. These methods establish constrained multi-objective optimization problem:
sample-efficient charging optimization, but they either learn
minf(θ) = {t (θ),∆T (θ),Q (θ)}, (1)
only from task-specific numerical evaluations or require an c p s
θ
explicitly specified predictive prior. LLMBO-MO instead
converts textual domain context into guarded warm-start and where t c is charging time, ∆T p is the peak temperature
regional preferences while retaining simulator evaluation as rise above the initial temperature, and Q s is a protocol-level
the sole source of objective data. degradation indicator. All three objectives are minimized. The
corresponding nondominated protocols form the Pareto set,
B. Expensive Multiobjective Optimization whose image in objective space is the Pareto front.
ParEGO decomposes an expensive vector-valued problem
into scalar subproblems and applies a single-objective sur-
B. Decision Variables and Constraints
rogate and acquisition rule [15]. Constraint-aware BO can
additionally model the probability of satisfying expensive
A three-stage constant-current protocol is adopted. The
inequalities [16]. Direct multiobjective alternatives optimize
decision vector is
expected hypervolume improvement, including differentiable
qEHVI and its noise-aware qNEHVI extension [17], [18]. θ = [I ,I ,I ,∆s ,∆s ]⊤, (2)
1 2 3 1 2
Surrogate-assisted evolutionary algorithms such as DISK and
PIMD instead use Kriging predictions with distribution- or infill- where I ,I ,I are the stage currents and ∆s ,∆s are
1 2 3 1 2
based selection [19], [20]; their implementations are available the SOC widths of the first two stages. The third width is
in PlatEMO [21]. The present method uses a ParEGO-style determined by the remaining SOC window. The bounds used
decomposition so that each iteration needs one scalar GP, in this work are listed in Table I.
which provides a controlled setting for isolating the effect of
The main geometric constraint is
LLM guidance. The absence of an archived qEHVI/qNEHVI
comparison is reported explicitly in Section VI.
∆s + ∆s ≤ 0.70, (3)
1 2
C. LLM-Assisted Bayesian Optimization
which ensures that a nontrivial third stage remains. During LLM
LLAMBO demonstrated that LLMs can support zero-shot candidate generation, a softer safety margin ∆s +∆s ≤ 0.65
1 2
initialization, surrogate reasoning, and candidate sampling is used to discourage protocols near the hard boundary.

=== Page 3 ===
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TRANSPORTATION ELECTRIFICATION, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH 2026 3
C. Operational Constraints B. Three-Stage Charging Realization
During simulation, each protocol must satisfy voltage, For the decision vector θ = [I 1 ,I 2 ,I 3 ,∆s 1 ,∆s 2 ]⊤, the
temperature, and SOC limits: charging interval from SOC 0 to 0.8 is partitioned into three
constant-current stages. The third SOC width is determined by
V (θ) ≤ V , (4)
peak max
∆s = 0.8 − ∆s − ∆s . (9)
T (θ) ≤ T , (5) 3 1 2
peak max
0 ≤ SOC(t) ≤ 0.80. (6) The stages are simulated sequentially, with the terminal
electrochemical and thermal states of one stage serving as
Protocols that violate hard operational constraints receive
the initial states of the next.
dominated sentinel values and are excluded from the feasible
For a stage spanning ∆s , the nominal charging duration
k
Pareto set.
follows from charge balance,
Q ∆s
IV. ELECTROCHEMICAL–THERMAL EVALUATION MODEL t k = e I ff cell k 3600, k = 1,2,3, (10)
k
The proposed optimization framework requires a forward
where Q is the effective cell capacity in Ah and Icell is
model that maps each charging protocol to its charging-time, eff k
the physical charging current in A. The total charging time is
thermal, and degradation-indicator responses. Since the focus
therefore
of this work is the optimization strategy rather than the 3
∑︂
development of a new battery model, all methods are evaluated t (θ) = t . (11)
c k
using the same physics-based simulation environment. The
k=1
simulator combines an electrochemical Single Particle Model
For the 5-Ah Chen2020 case, the protocol-current coordi-
with electrolyte dynamics (SPMe), a lumped thermal model,
nates coincide with the corresponding physical currents. For
and a protocol-level semi-empirical degradation proxy. This
other cell parameterizations, the same protocol coordinates are
construction retains the principal electrochemical and thermal
capacity-scaled before simulation so that comparable charging-
effects relevant to fast charging while remaining sufficiently
rate regimes are explored rather than identical absolute currents.
efficient for repeated black-box evaluations.
During each simulation, the voltage and temperature trajecto-
ries are monitored. A protocol is regarded as feasible only when
A. Electrochemical–Thermal Dynamics the prescribed SOC interval is completed without violating
the cell-specific voltage and temperature limits. Infeasible
The electrochemical dynamics are represented by the SPMe,
evaluations are excluded from the feasible Pareto set used
a reduced-order approximation of the Doyle–Fuller–Newman
for performance assessment.
model that retains electrolyte concentration dynamics while
representing each porous electrode by a characteristic spherical
active-material particle [22]. Solid-phase lithium diffusion, elec- C. Protocol-Level Degradation Indicator
trolyte transport, and interfacial reaction kinetics are therefore A single fast-charging simulation cannot resolve long-
retained at a substantially lower computational cost than a full- horizon capacity fade without introducing a substantially more
order porous-electrode model. The numerical implementation expensive aging model. Accordingly, the third objective is
is based on PyBaMM [23]. a semi-empirical protocol-level degradation indicator. Let s¯,
The electrochemical model is coupled to a spatially lumped T¯, and I¯ denote the trajectory-averaged SOC, temperature,
thermal balance, which may be written in the form and charging current, respectively. An empirical effective-
capacity function, Cap(s¯,T¯,I¯), is used to summarize the
dT
C th dt = Q˙ gen − hA(T − T amb ), (7) combined influence of these operating conditions. The resulting
degradation indicator is
where C is the effective thermal capacitance of the cell,
th
Q o ˙ h g m en ic de lo n s o s t e e s s , th a e nd he r a e t ve g r e s n ib er le ate e d ffe b c y ts e , le h ctr is oc t h h e e m e ic ff a e l c r t e iv a e cti h o e n a s t , Q s (θ) = 100 Cap Q (s¯ e , ff T¯,I¯) . (12)
transfer coefficient, and A is the heat-transfer area. The thermal A smaller Q corresponds to a less severe charging condition
s
objective is summarized by the peak temperature rise under the adopted empirical model. Importantly, Q is a relative
s
degradation indicator for comparing protocols under a common
∆T (θ) = maxT(t) − T . (8)
p t init simulation environment; it is not a chemistry-specific prediction
of the absolute capacity loss caused by one charging event.
The Chen2020 parameter set is used for the primary LG
This distinction is maintained throughout the evaluation.
INR21700-M50 study [24]. To examine whether the optimiza-
tion behavior persists under a different cell parameterization,
additional experiments are conducted with the Ecker2015 D. Black-Box Evaluation Interface
parameter set [25]. Cell-dependent voltage and temperature
The coupled simulator defines the mapping
limits are specified in the experimental setup, while the
optimization procedure itself is kept unchanged. S : θ ↦−→ [t (θ),∆T (θ),Q (θ)]⊤ , (13)
c p s

=== Page 4 ===
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TRANSPORTATION ELECTRIFICATION, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH 2026 4
together with a feasibility indicator. From the perspective of Following the decomposition strategy of ParEGO [15], the
Bayesian optimization, this simulator is treated as an expensive vector-valued problem is converted at each iteration into an
black box: the optimizer observes only previously evaluated augmented Tchebycheff subproblem:
protocols, their objective values, and feasibility information,
3
rather than the internal electrochemical states used to generate gtch(θ | w) = max {︁ w f¯(θ) }︁ + η ∑︂ w f¯(θ), (16)
i i i i
them. Consequently, the same optimization framework can i∈{1,2,3}
i=1
be evaluated under different battery parameterizations without where w ∈ R3 , ∑︁ w = 1, and η = 0.05. The augmentation
changing its decision logic. + i i
term reduces ties around the maximum weighted deviation.
To distribute the scalar subproblems over distinct trade-off
V. PROPOSED LLMBO-MO FRAMEWORK
directions, a Riesz s-energy reference set is used [26]. For a
A. Framework Overview weight set W = {w(1),...,w(N)} on the simplex, its energy
is
LLMBO-MO is designed to incorporate battery-domain ∑︂⃦ ⃦−s
E (W) = ⃦w(p) − w(q)⃦ . (17)
knowledge without replacing the numerical decision mechanism s ⃦ ⃦
of Bayesian optimization (BO). The LLM is used at two p<q
controlled touchpoints: it first proposes a pool of physically The implementation initializes W from a Das–Dennis simplex
plausible initial protocols, and, during the early BO iterations, lattice and applies projected repulsive-gradient relaxation to
it expresses a coarse preference for a promising point or region. reduce (17), rather than assuming that the global minimum of
All objective values entering the surrogate are obtained from the energy is available in closed form. Weight vectors are then
the simulator; unevaluated LLM suggestions are never inserted visited without replacement before the set is reshuffled, which
as observations. The next protocol is selected by scalarization, provides dispersed coverage of the three-objective trade-off
a Gaussian-process (GP) surrogate, and expected improvement space.
(EI), followed by simulator evaluation and Pareto-set update.
At iteration t, a weight vector w(t) specifies the current
C. Gaussian-Process Surrogate
objective trade-off. The evaluated multi-objective database
For the current weight vector, a single-output GP is fitted to
is re-scalarized under w(t), a GP is fitted to the resulting
{(θ ,gtch)}|D| . Each decision variable is first mapped to [0,1].
scalar targets, and the LLM may provide a point/region j j j=1
The covariance model is an automatic-relevance- determination
preference from the current optimization state. Following the
Matérn-5/2 kernel with a white-noise term,
region-lifted preference principle of LGBO [11], the valid
preference is converted into a mean adjustment used only (︃ √ 5r2)︃ √
k(θ,θ′) = σ2 1 + 5r + e− 5r + σ2δ , (18)
during acquisition. In the configuration evaluated in Section VI, f 3 n θθ′
this adjustment uses GP posterior cross-covariance; no separate
LLM acquisition bonus, LLM reranking, or direct insertion of r2 = ∑︂ 5 (x d − x′ d )2 ,
ℓ2
LLM-generated iteration candidates is used. If a preference d=1 d
cannot be converted into a valid feasible region, the method
where x denotes the normalized coordinate and ℓ is its
d d
reverts to ordinary EI.
learned length scale. Kernel hyperparameters are estimated by
Figure 1 summarizes the constrained warm start, the numeri-
marginal-likelihood optimization with multiple restarts. The
cal MOBO loop, and the two advisory LLM touchpoints while
scalar targets are standardized during GP fitting. The posterior
keeping the simulator-evaluated data path explicit.
mean µ (θ), standard deviation σ (θ), and posterior covariance
t t
are subsequently used by EI and the region-lift mechanism.
B. Objective Transformation and Scalar Decomposition
The three objectives in (1) have substantially different D. LLM Integration Through Two Controlled Touchpoints
numerical scales. We therefore transform charging time and 1) Touchpoint 1: Constrained Warm-Start Portfolio: The
the degradation indicator logarithmically, while retaining the warm-start prompt provides the cell/model context, decision-
temperature-rise objective in its original scale: variable bounds, the hard constraint in (3), and battery-design
˜f(θ) = [︁ log t (θ) ∆T (θ) log Q (θ) ]︁⊤ . (14) heuristics such as avoiding unnecessarily aggressive high-SOC
10 c p 10 s charging and considering decreasing current profiles. The LLM
Let z˜∗ denote the corresponding transformed ideal value. For overgenerates a candidate pool. Candidate responses are parsed
i
objective i, the ideal-point gap is scaled as and repaired, after which nonfinite or malformed points, out-
of-bound protocols, hard ∆s +∆s violations, and duplicates
⃓ ⃓ 1 2
f¯ i (θ) = ⃓ ⃓ f˜ i (θ s ) − z˜ i ∗⃓ ⃓ , s i = max(y max,i − y min,i ,ϵ i ), are T r h e e m re o m ve a d in . ing candidates are selected greedily to balance the
i
(15) LLM’s reported confidence, distance from the soft ∆s 1 +∆s 2
where y and y are computed from the transformed limit, monotone-current structure, and geometric diversity. For
min,i max,i
feasible observations. The small range floor ϵ prevents unstable candidate θ, define
i
scaling when the early observations occupy only a narrow [∆s + ∆s − s ]
objective interval. p soft (θ) = 1 s − 2 s soft +, (19)
hard soft

=== Page 5 ===
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TRANSPORTATION ELECTRIFICATION, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH 2026 5
Fig. 1. Unified LLMBO-MO workflow. A: constrained warm-start construction combines domain-informed LLM candidates with physics priors and space-filling
samples, then repairs, screens, and verifies the portfolio in the simulator. B: the numerical multi-objective BO loop performs scalarization, GP fitting,
expected-improvement optimization, and simulator evaluation. The LLM enters only through the two advisory touchpoints; invalid or infeasible iteration-level
guidance falls back to plain EI, and only simulator outputs update the optimization state.
with s = 0.65 and s = 0.70, and let I (θ) = 1 current weight vector w(t), ideal point and objective scaling, the
soft hard mono
when I ≥ I ≥ I . The score used when extending a selected best scalarized observations, recent evaluated protocols, short-
1 2 3
portfolio C is horizon hypervolume feedback, boundary-failure statistics,
sel
J (θ) = c (θ)−ω p (θ)+ω I (θ)+ω d (θ,C ), and feedback on the previously adopted region. The prompt
ws ws p soft m mono d min sel
explicitly asks for a preference rather than the next experiment.
(20)
The output is restricted to either a raw-coordinate point
where c ∈ [0,1] is the LLM-reported candidate confidence
ws
θ , a hyper-rectangular region [lb,ub], or no preference,
and d is the minimum Euclidean distance in normalized pref
min
together with a self-reported confidence c ∈ [0,1] and a short
decision space to an already selected protocol. A small number t
mechanistic rationale.
of near-boundary probes can be retained to avoid collapsing the
initial design into only conservative schedules. If too few valid The interface checks the output format, coordinate system,
LLM candidates remain, deterministic battery heuristics and direction of the preference, and parameter bounds. A region is
Latin-hypercube/random samples complete the initialization. clipped/repaired to admissible width and volume limits and to
Only after simulator evaluation are these protocols added to the ∆s safety geometry. A point preference is converted to a
D. small local box before the same processing. Low confidence
The complete hypothesis-to-observation path is shown in does not by itself create a hard rejection in the reported region-
the constrained warm-start block of Fig. 1. lift variant; instead, c t directly scales the strength of the lift. If
2) Touchpoint 2: Weight-Conditioned Point/Region Prefer- the response is absent, unparsable, structurally invalid, or yields
ence: During an early guidance window, the LLM receives the no feasible anchors, its influence is set to zero and acquisition

=== Page 6 ===
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TRANSPORTATION ELECTRIFICATION, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH 2026 6
reduces to ordinary EI. Algorithm 1 LLMBO-MO
Require: Simulator S, LLM L, BO budget T, warm-start count nws, weight
set W, guidance horizon TL
E. Posterior-Covariance Region Lift for Battery MOBO Ensure: Nondominated set P and hypervolume trace
1: Generate or load the Riesz-relaxed weight set W
The general region-lift idea follows LGBO [11]; here it is
2: Query L for an overgenerated warm-start pool
specialized to a sequentially scalarized, constrained battery- 3: Repair/filter the pool and select nws protocols by Jws
charging problem and to a posterior-cross-covariance coupling. 4: for each selected warm-start protocol do
5: Evaluate S and add the resulting observation to D
Let a valid preferred region be represented by M feasible
6: end for
Sobol anchors G = {g 1 ,...,g M }. The reported configuration 7: for t = 1 to T do
uses uniform anchor weights, 8: Select w(t) ∈ W and update transformed objective scaling
9: Compute gtch(· | w(t)) for all feasible observations
1 10: Fit the GP to the current scalarized database
v = 1 . (21)
M M 11: Set the region-lift coupling to inactive
12: if t ≤ TL then
All quantities in the following lift are expressed in the 13: Query L for a point/region preference conditioned on w(t)
standardized GP target space. Let Σ be the posterior 14: Repair the region and construct feasible Sobol anchors
GG,t
15: if the preference and regional covariance are valid then
covariance matrix among the anchors. The posterior variance
16: Build λt and the posterior-covariance mean lift in (24)
of the regional average is 17: end if
18: end if
V G,t = v⊤Σ GG,t v. (22) 19: Maximize EI using the lifted mean if active, otherwise plain EI
20: Evaluate S(θt+1) and update D, P, and HV
The confidence-normalized lift strength is 21: end for
c 22: return P
λ = t , (23)
t √︁
max(V ,ε )
G,t v
where ε > 0 prevents numerical division by a vanishing samples, and multi-start L-BFGS-B solutions of EI. Each
v √
regional variance and bounds λ by 1/ ε . For any candidate proposed point is repaired to satisfy the decision bounds and the
t v
θ, let Σ denote the GP posterior cross-covariance between hard ∆s + ∆s constraint. Stagnation does not add an LLM-
θG,t 1 2
θ and the anchors. The acquisition-time mean becomes specific bonus to (27); instead, it expands the Gaussian restart
dispersion, thereby increasing exploration while preserving
µL(θ) = µ (θ) − λ Σ v, (24)
t t t θG,t EI as the ranking criterion. If EI is numerically flat over the
while the predictive variance is unchanged, candidate pool, the implementation falls back to the point with
largest predictive uncertainty.
(︁ σL(θ) )︁2 = σ2(θ). (25)
t t
For this minimization problem, the negative mean shift makes VI. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
points that are posterior-correlated with the preferred region A. Simulation Setup and Evaluation Protocol
more competitive under EI. The operation is an acquisition-time
All quantitative results are obtained in simulation; no new
preference transformation only: it neither modifies the training
physical-cell measurements are reported. The simulator uses
targets nor treats LLM statements as pseudo-observations. In
the SPMe formulation in Section IV with either the Chen2020
the reported configuration, the lift is active only during the
or Ecker2015 parameter set. The optimizer minimizes charging
first T = 16 BO iterations; subsequent iterations use the
L time, peak temperature rise, and the protocol-level degrada-
unmodified GP posterior.
tion indicator. Unless noted otherwise, one run contains six
The numerical-loop block of Fig. 1 shows how this optional
initialization evaluations followed by 50 BO iterations, for
advisory branch joins the otherwise conventional MOBO loop
a total of 56 simulator evaluations. Table II summarizes the
without changing the observation database or GP variance.
two fixed-budget comparisons used for the principal numerical
claims.
F. Expected Improvement and Stagnation-Aware Search
The archive field canonical_hv is the primary quality
Let g be the best scalarized value observed for the metric. It is the hypervolume of the nondominated set in trans-
min,t
current weight vector. EI is evaluated using the lifted mean formed objective space under a fixed parameterization-specific
when a valid coupling is active: reference box; higher is better. The value is dimensionless but
g − µL(θ)
z (θ) = min,t t , (26)
t σ (θ)
t TABLE II
α (θ) = (︁ g − µL(θ) )︁ Φ(z ) + σ (θ)ϕ(z ). (27) PROTOCOL FOR THE PRINCIPAL FIXED-BUDGET COMPARISONS
EI min,t t t t t
When no valid lift is available, µL t = µ t , giving standard EI. Setting Chen2020 case Ecker2015 study
The next protocol is selected as
Runs (seeds) 1 (8409) 5 (8409–8413)
Initialization evaluations 6 6
θ t+1 = arg max α EI (θ). (28) BO iterations 50 50
θ∈Θfeas
Total simulator evaluations 56 56
Acquisition optimization uses a mixed candidate pool LLM-guidance horizon 16 16
Primary comparator ParEGO ParEGO
containing the current best protocol, Gaussian and uniform

=== Page 7 ===
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TRANSPORTATION ELECTRIFICATION, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH 2026 7
is not restricted to [0,1], so absolute values are compared only TABLE III
within the same cell parameterization. Reported uncertainties FINAL CANONICAL HYPERVOLUME AT 56 SIMULATOR EVALUATIONS
are sample standard deviations across seeds.
Cell model Method Runs Final HV ↑
The figures intentionally use three scopes. Fixed-budget
tables report either the Chen2020 seed-8409 case or five Chen2020 ParEGO 1 0.3523
LLMBO-MO 1 0.3848
paired Ecker2015 runs. The Pareto-count curve aggregates
ParEGO 5 1.5866 ± 0.0116
five archived runs per method, whereas the three-dimensional Ecker2015
LLMBO-MO 5 1.8684 ± 0.0024
Pareto plot pools Chen2020 LLMBO-MO archives to visualize
the attainable design envelope. Captions identify these scopes,
and pooled archives are not used to compute the fixed-budget
Because the archived LLMBO-MO runs begin from a larger
statistics.
evaluated database, this difference is not used to claim improved
sample efficiency. The matched final HV values remain the
B. Laboratory Platform and Reporting Scope
primary comparison.
Figure 2 documents the laboratory’s standard charging-
control demonstration platform and the intended hardware
E. Pareto Trade-offs and Charging Profiles
interface for future validation. The host computer dispatches
current schedules to the programmable power-supply channels, Figure 4 connects objective-space trade-offs to time-domain
while the voltage and auxiliary-temperature modules acquire charging behavior. The left panel pools 730 evaluated Chen2020
the responses of the cylindrical lithium-ion cells. The five- points from archived LLMBO-MO runs and displays the 233
dimensional protocol in (2) can be translated directly into nondominated points. Pooling reveals the design envelope but is
channel current commands and SOC-triggered stage changes. not used for Table III. The starred solutions span speed-focused,
The photograph is included to clarify the deployment context, balanced, and thermally conservative regimes.
not to imply that its measurements are part of the numerical Point A occupies the fast-charging edge and has the largest
results reported below. temperature rise and degradation indicator. Point B minimizes
the indicator among the marked solutions, whereas C lies near
C. Baselines and Comparison Scope the knee of the time–temperature trade-off. Points D and E
reduce the temperature rise to approximately 1.53 K at the
ParEGO is the principal BO baseline because it uses the same
cost of longer charging. The tuned replay uses a brief 5-A
scalarized surrogate-and-acquisition structure without language-
middle stage, shortens charging relative to the warm-start and
model guidance [15]. NSGA-II provides an evolutionary
numerical baseline profiles, and correspondingly produces a
reference [27], while DISK and PIMD provide surrogate-
larger temperature excursion. All three simulated voltage traces
assisted evolutionary context [19], [20]. The latter archives
remain below the 4.3-V limit.
use their native population initializations and are not part
of the matched 56-evaluation statistical comparison. Direct
hypervolume acquisition methods such as qEHVI and qNEHVI F. Ablation Analysis
are strong modern MOBO alternatives [17], [18], but no audited
The four-group study isolates the two LLM touchpoints at
runs of these methods are available in the present archive.
the configuration level. Baseline, WarmStart, and LLM_Region
Consequently, superiority claims are restricted to the matched
are taken from the May 22 five-seed archive; the full method
ParEGO comparisons in Table III; all LLM suggestions are
is taken from the paired May 23 rerun using the same selected
simulated before they become objective observations.
warm-start initialization. Figure 5 therefore preserves five-seed
distributions but is a consolidated archive summary, not a single
D. Fixed-Budget Performance
simultaneously executed four-arm batch.
Figure 3 separates final-set quality from archive growth. Warm starting gives the larger and more repeatable
The left panel retains the original canonical-HV scale to individual-component gain, improving mean HV by 0.0066
expose early jumps and later plateaus. The right panel counts and winning four of five paired seeds. Region guidance
nondominated protocols after each BO iteration; it is an also improves the mean but has greater dispersion. Their
archive diagnostic rather than an evaluation-normalized quality combination attains the highest mean HV, 0.3932. The 3/5 win
measure. count and consolidated-batch construction preclude a claim of
Table III gives the matched fixed-budget values. In the uniform per-seed synergy.
representative Chen2020 seed-8409 case, LLMBO-MO in-
creases canonical HV from 0.3523 to 0.3848, a 9.2% gain.
G. Runtime, Limitations, and Deployment Outlook
This single-seed case is not interpreted as a population-level
mean improvement. On Ecker2015, LLMBO-MO raises the The archived Chen2020 timing runs give 194.3 ± 11.8 s
five-seed mean from 1.5866 to 1.8684, an absolute gain of for NSGA-II, 252.4 ± 17.7 s for ParEGO, and 440.3 ± 31.3 s
0.2818 (17.8%), while reducing the sample standard deviation for LLMBO-MO. LLMBO-MO is approximately 1.74 times
by approximately 79%. slower than ParEGO because wall time includes LLM requests,
The archive-size panel in Fig. 3 ends at 49.4±2.4 nondom- response validation, region processing, and a larger acquisition
inated protocols for LLMBO-MO and 45.8 ± 0.7 for ParEGO. pool. Hardware and API-latency metadata were not retained,

=== Page 8 ===
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TRANSPORTATION ELECTRIFICATION, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH 2026 8
Fig. 2. Laboratory charging and measurement platform used for charging-control demonstrations. The host computer issues current commands to the
power-supply module; voltage and auxiliary-temperature modules acquire cell responses. All quantitative comparisons in this paper remain simulation-based
and do not use measurements from this setup.
Fig. 3. Chen2020 search diagnostics. Left: canonical-HV trajectories; LLMBO-MO and ParEGO centerlines are seed 8409, while NSGA-II, DISK, and PIMD
centerlines are five-seed means. The LLMBO-MO and ParEGO ribbons are archived proxy dispersion envelopes rather than confidence intervals; the remaining
ribbons show one sample standard deviation. Right: five-seed mean nondominated-archive size with ±1 sample-standard-deviation bands. Because the initial
archive sizes differ, the right panel is descriptive only.
so these values document archive-specific overhead rather than Physical-cell measurements from the platform in Fig. 2,
a portable runtime benchmark. identical initial databases across every baseline, and audited
qEHVI/qNEHVI runs are needed before making hardware-level
The evidence is limited to simulation, two parameterizations, or broad state-of-the-art claims.
at most five seeds, and a ParEGO-centered matched comparison.
The Chen2020 trajectory also mixes a single-seed centerline
with multi-seed contextual baselines, as stated in its caption.

=== Page 9 ===
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TRANSPORTATION ELECTRIFICATION, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH 2026 9
Point Time (s) Temp. rise (K) Degrad. ind. (%)
A 2880 7.567 1.261
B 5295 4.996 0.538
C 6151 2.837 0.571
D 6928 1.535 0.685
E 7199 1.528 0.640
Fig. 4. Objective-space and time-domain views of Chen2020 charging protocols. Left: pooled LLMBO-MO nondominated set; stars A–E mark representative
trade-offs from fast/high-stress to slow/low-stress charging. Right: simulator replay of a tuned LLMBO-MO protocol, a warm-start-only protocol, and the
numerical baseline: (a) terminal voltage, (b) cell temperature, (c) applied current, and (d) SOC. The archived legend “LLMGP Tuned” denotes the tuned
LLMBO-MO configuration.
FIVE-SEED NUMERICAL SUMMARY
Variant Final HV ∆ Wins
Baseline 0.3836 ± 0.0101 – –
WarmStart 0.3902 ± 0.0078 +0.0066 4/5
LLM_Region 0.3862 ± 0.0112 +0.0026 4/5
Full LLMBO 0.3932 ± 0.0117 +0.0096 3/5
Fig. 5. Chen2020 four-group ablation over five seeds and 50 BO iterations. Left: final canonical-HV distributions; markers are individual seeds, and boxes
show the interquartile range and median. Right: mean, sample standard deviation, gain over baseline, and paired-seed win count.
VII. CONCLUSION touchpoints, with their combination attaining the highest mean
hypervolume.
This paper addressed sample-limited multiobjective fast-
charging design with LLMBO-MO, a framework that uses The current evidence remains bounded by two simulated
language-model output as a guarded preference prior rather than parameterizations, small seed counts, a semi-empirical degrada-
as measured objective data. A constraint-screened warm-start tion indicator, and the absence of matched qEHVI/qNEHVI and
portfolio improves the initial design, and an early posterior- physical-cell results. The next step is to replay selected Pareto
covariance region lift biases acquisition without altering GP protocols on the laboratory platform documented in Fig. 2,
training targets or predictive variance. Under matched 56- quantify measurement noise and cell-to-cell variation, and
simulation budgets, LLMBO-MO improves final hypervolume evaluate stronger direct-hypervolume baselines under identical
over ParEGO by 9.2% in the retained Chen2020 case and initial databases. Extending the framework to variable-stage
by 17.8% across five Ecker2015 seeds. The ablation archive and mixed discrete–continuous protocols, as well as locally
further shows positive mean contributions from both LLM hosted LLM backends, is also of practical interest.

=== Page 10 ===
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TRANSPORTATION ELECTRIFICATION, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH 2026 10
REFERENCES [15] J. Knowles, “ParEGO: A hybrid algorithm with on-line landscape
approximation for expensive multiobjective optimization problems,” IEEE
[1] N. Nitta et al., “Li-ion battery materials: Present and future,” Materials Trans. Evol. Comput., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 50–66, 2006.
Today, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 252–264, 2015.
[16] J. R. Gardner, M. J. Kusner, Z. Xu, K. Q. Weinberger, and J. P. Cun-
[2] A. Tomaszewska et al., “Lithium-ion battery fast charging: A review,” ningham, “Bayesian optimization with inequality constraints,” in Proc.
eTransportation, vol. 1, Art. no. 100011, 2019. 31st Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., PMLR, vol. 32, pp. 937–945, 2014.
[3] X.-G. Yang and C.-Y. Wang, “Understanding the trilemma of fast
[17] S. Daulton, M. Balandat, and E. Bakshy, “Differentiable expected hyper-
charging, energy density and cycle life of lithium-ion batteries,” J. Power
volume improvement for parallel multi-objective Bayesian optimization,”
Sources, vol. 402, pp. 489–498, 2018. in Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 33, pp. 9851–9864, 2020.
[4] B. Shahriari et al., “Taking the human out of the loop: A review of
[18] S. Daulton, M. Balandat, and E. Bakshy, “Parallel Bayesian optimization
Bayesian optimization,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 104, no. 1, pp. 148–175, 2016.
of multiple noisy objectives with expected hypervolume improvement,”
[5] P. M. Attia et al., “Closed-loop optimization of fast-charging protocols in Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 34, pp. 2187–2200, 2021.
for batteries with machine learning,” Nature, vol. 578, pp. 397–402,
[19] Z. Zhang, Y. Wang, G. Sun, and T. Pang, “A distribution information-
2020.
based Kriging-assisted evolutionary algorithm for expensive many-
[6] B. Jiang and X. Wang, “Constrained Bayesian optimization for minimum- objective optimization problems,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., vol. 29,
time charging of lithium-ion batteries,” IEEE Control Syst. Lett., vol. 6,
no. 6, pp. 2656–2670, 2025.
pp. 1682–1687, 2022.
[20] Y. Li, W. Li, S. Li, and Y. Zhao, “An infill sampling criterion based on
[7] B.Jiangetal.,“Fastchargingdesignforlithium-ionbatteriesviaBayesian
improvement of probability and mapping crowding distance for expensive
optimization,” Appl. Energy, vol. 307, Art. no. 118244, 2022. multi/many-objective optimization,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 133,
[8] X. Wang and B. Jiang, “Multi-objective optimization for fast charging
Art. no. 108616, 2024.
design of lithium-ion batteries using constrained Bayesian optimization,”
[21] Y.Tian,R.Cheng,X.Zhang,andY.Jin,“PlatEMO:AMATLABplatform
J. Power Sources, vol. 584, Art. no. 233602, 2023. for evolutionary multi-objective optimization [educational forum],” IEEE
[9] W. Jeong, S. Heo, and J. H. Lee, “Health-conscious charging of lithium- Comput. Intell. Mag., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 73–87, 2017.
ion batteries using Bayesian optimization guided by a semi-empirical
[22] S. G. Marquis, V. Sulzer, R. Timms, C. P. Please, and S. J. Chapman,
aging model,” J. Energy Storage, vol. 141, Art. no. 119348, 2026. “An asymptotic derivation of a single particle model with electrolyte,” J.
[10] T. Liu, N. Astorga, N. Seedat, and M. van der Schaar, “Large language Electrochem. Soc., vol. 166, no. 15, pp. A3693–A3706, 2019.
models to enhance Bayesian optimization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. [23] V. Sulzer et al., “Python Battery Mathematical Modelling (PyBaMM),”
Represent., 2024. J. Open Res. Softw., vol. 9, no. 1, Art. no. 14, 2021.
[11] X. Yuan et al., “Unleashing LLMs in Bayesian optimization: Preference-
[24] C.-H. Chen, F. Brosa Planella, K. O’Regan, D. Gastol, W. D. Widanage,
guided framework for scientific discovery,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
and E. Kendrick, “Development of experimental techniques for param-
Represent., 2026. eterization of multi-scale lithium-ion battery models,” J. Electrochem.
[12] Z. Chen et al., “LABO: LLM-accelerated Bayesian optimization through Soc., vol. 167, no. 8, Art. no. 080534, 2020.
broad exploration and selective experimentation,” in Proc. 43rd Int. Conf.
[25] M. Ecker, T. K. D. Tran, P. Dechent, S. Käbitz, A. Warnecke, and
Mach. Learn., PMLR, vol. 306, 2026.
D. U. Sauer, “Parameterization of a physico-chemical model of a
[13] G. Dong, Y. Feng, Y. Lou, M. Zhang, and J. Wei, “Data-driven fast lithium-ion battery: I. Determination of parameters,” J. Electrochem.
charging optimization for lithium-ion battery using Bayesian optimization Soc., vol. 162, no. 9, pp. A1836–A1848, 2015.
with fast convergence,” IEEE Trans. Transp. Electrific., vol. 10, no. 2,
[26] J. G. Falcón-Cardona, H. Ishibuchi, and C. A. Coello Coello, “Riesz
pp. 4173–4183, 2024. s-energy-based reference sets for multi-objective optimization,” in Proc.
[14] R. Zhu, W. Peng, F. Yang, and M. Xie, “Fast-charging protocols IEEE Congr. Evol. Comput., pp. 1–8, 2020.
design of lithium-ion battery: A multiple-objective Bayesian optimization
[27] K. Deb, A. Pratap, S. Agarwal, and T. Meyarivan, “A fast and elitist
perspective,” IEEE Trans. Transp. Electrific., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 8327– multiobjective genetic algorithm: NSGA-II,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput.,
8338, 2025.
vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 182–197, 2002.
