SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TRANSPORTATION ELECTRIFICATION
1
Battery Fast-Charging Protocol Design via
Large Language Model-Guided Multiobjective
Bayesian Optimization
Anonymous Authors
Abstract—Lithium-ion batteries are widely used in electric
vehicles and energy-storage systems, making efficient and reliable
fast charging increasingly important. As charging requirements
become more diverse, charging strategies must balance charging
speed, safety, and battery degradation under different user
preferences. Bayesian optimization (BO) has shown strong
potential for battery charging design because it can identify high-
quality solutions with a limited number of expensive evaluations.
However, when observations are sparse, BO can suffer from unin-
formed initialization and insufficient task-specific guidance during
early-stage search, leaving valuable battery-domain knowledge
underutilized. Recent advances in large language models (LLMs),
particularly their contextual reasoning, few-shot learning, and
domain-knowledge capabilities, provide a promising means of
complementing BO in such low-data regimes. Motivated by these
advances, this paper proposes LLMBO-MO, an LLM-guided
multiobjective Bayesian optimization framework for lithium-ion
battery charging design. LLMBO-MO first employs an LLM-
informed initialization strategy to generate promising and diverse
initial charging protocols from battery-domain knowledge. It
then introduces a posterior-covariance Region-Lift mechanism
that converts weight-conditioned LLM regional preferences into
bounded acquisition-time mean shifts, thereby changing candidate
ranking without inserting pseudo-observations or altering GP
uncertainty. Extensive experiments demonstrate that LLMBO-MO
consistently outperforms conventional BO methods and achieves
a 9.3% higher final hypervolume than ParEGO.
Index Terms—Lithium-ion batteries, battery charging, Bayesian
optimization, large language models, multiobjective optimization.
I. INTRODUCTION
Lithium-ion batteries have been widely adopted in electric
vehicles (EVs) and energy-storage systems due to their high en-
ergy density and long cycle life [1]. With the rapid development
of EVs, increasing demand has been placed on fast charging.
However, increasing the charging current generally leads to
greater heat generation and accelerated battery degradation,
which can adversely affect both battery safety and service life.
Therefore, achieving an appropriate balance among charging
time, safety, and battery degradation has become an important
problem in lithium-ion battery charging design [2], [3]. Such
a design problem typically involves multiple conflicting ob-
jectives and is subject to operational constraints on charging
current, voltage, temperature, state of charge (SOC), and other
battery states. It can therefore be naturally formulated as a
constrained multiobjective optimization problem (CMOP) [2].
Various optimization methods have been developed for
charging-strategy design. For example, deep reinforcement
learning has been applied to multiobjective battery charging
strategy design [5]. Physics-based optimization methods de-
scribe the internal battery dynamics using electrochemical, ther-
mal, and degradation models, and then optimize the charging
strategy using numerical optimization or model predictive con-
trol (MPC). For example, Liu et al. investigated multiobjective
charging optimization using an electrochemical–thermal–aging
model [2], while Hwang et al. combined an enhanced single-
particle model with MPC to optimize charging current while
accounting for battery degradation mechanisms [4]. Although
these approaches provide physically interpretable optimization
frameworks, they generally require repeated evaluations of the
underlying battery model. High-fidelity electrochemical models
can involve complex coupled dynamic equations, making large-
scale searches computationally expensive. Consequently, the
number of candidate protocols that can be evaluated within a
practical computational budget is often limited.
Bayesian optimization (BO) is particularly suitable for
expensive black-box optimization problems because it can
identify promising solutions with relatively few evaluations
of the true objective functions. BO typically constructs a
probabilistic surrogate model, such as a Gaussian process (GP),
to approximate the objective function and uses an acquisition
function to balance exploitation and exploration [6]. This
property is well aligned with battery charging optimization,
where the evaluation of a candidate charging protocol may
require computationally expensive high-fidelity simulations or
time-consuming battery experiments. Attia et al. demonstrated
that a closed-loop machine-learning framework based on BO
can substantially reduce the number of experiments required
for charging-protocol optimization [3]. Jiang et al. further
applied BO to lithium-ion battery fast-charging design and
demonstrated its ability to identify high-quality charging
protocols with a limited number of evaluations [7]. Wang
and Jiang subsequently extended this line of research to
multiobjective charging design by simultaneously considering
charging time and battery degradation [8].
Despite its sample efficiency, however, BO does not necessar-
ily make effective use of a limited evaluation budget throughout
the entire optimization process. In particular, during the initial
stage, the surrogate model must be constructed from only a
small number of initial observations. When these observations
contain little useful task-specific prior information, BO may
spend a substantial number of evaluations exploring low-quality
regions before reaching promising parts of the search space,
resulting in a pronounced cold-start phase. Ramachandran et
al. showed that standard BO in relatively large search spaces

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TRANSPORTATION ELECTRIFICATION
2
may require exploration of multiple low-quality regions before
approaching the optimum, and that prior knowledge regarding
the location of high-quality solutions can effectively alleviate
this issue [9]. This limitation is particularly relevant to battery
charging design because each unproductive evaluation may
incur the cost of an additional high-fidelity simulation or
physical experiment.
In addition to initialization, effectively restricting and guiding
the subsequent search region is another important factor
affecting BO efficiency. Conventional BO generally optimizes
the acquisition function over the entire decision space. For
complex search spaces, such global acquisition optimization
can lead to excessive exploration of regions that are unlikely to
contain high-quality solutions. To address this issue, Eriksson et
al. proposed TuRBO, which employs local probabilistic models
and trust regions to concentrate the search on more promising
regions and demonstrated improved efficiency on challenging
black-box optimization problems [10]. More recently, Namura
and Takemori proposed Regional Expected Improvement (REI),
which identifies regions that are more likely to contain the
global optimum and uses them to determine the trust region
for subsequent search [11]. These studies suggest that if useful
information about promising regions can be obtained and
incorporated into BO, unnecessary exploration can be reduced
and optimization efficiency can be improved under a limited
evaluation budget.
Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) provide
a new opportunity to incorporate task-related prior knowledge
into BO. LLMs have demonstrated strong capabilities in
contextual understanding, few-shot learning, and knowledge
utilization, enabling them to reason about candidate solutions
from natural-language descriptions of a task. Unlike purely
data-driven optimization, which relies primarily on numerical
observations collected during optimization, an LLM can jointly
consider domain descriptions, variable semantics, physical
constraints, and previous optimization information when sug-
gesting potentially promising candidates. Yang et al. proposed
Optimization by PROmpting (OPRO), which provides an LLM
with historical candidates and their objective values and uses
the LLM to iteratively generate new optimization candidates
[13]. More directly, Liu et al. proposed LLAMBO, which
integrates LLMs into BO and investigated their use for zero-
shot warm starting, surrogate modeling, and candidate sampling.
Their results demonstrated the potential of LLM-derived prior
information to improve BO performance, particularly during
the early stage when only a small number of observations are
available [12].
Despite these developments, the use of LLMs to assist BO
for lithium-ion battery charging design remains insufficiently
explored. Compared with generic black-box or hyperparameter
optimization problems, battery charging protocols have explicit
physical meanings, while the relationships among different
charging stages and multiple optimization objectives contain
substantial domain knowledge. For example, battery-domain
knowledge can provide useful information about plausible
charging-current profiles, SOC allocation across charging
stages, and trade-offs among charging time, thermal behavior,
and degradation. How to exploit such knowledge to improve the
initial search quality of BO, and further use it to provide region-
level guidance according to the current optimization state,
remains an open research question. Under a limited evaluation
budget, these two aspects correspond to two distinct sources
of inefficiency: the cold-start problem at the beginning of BO
and potentially excessive exploration during the subsequent
global search.
To address these issues, this paper proposes LLM-guided
Multiobjective Bayesian Optimization (LLMBO-MO), a frame-
work for multiobjective charging-protocol design of lithium-ion
batteries. The proposed method is built upon a decomposition-
based multiobjective Bayesian optimization framework and uses
an LLM as a provider of domain knowledge and search priors,
while retaining BO as the primary numerical optimization mech-
anism. Specifically, an LLM-informed initialization strategy first
uses battery-charging knowledge to generate promising and
sufficiently diverse initial charging protocols, thereby improving
the initial state of BO. Subsequently, a posterior-covariance
Region-Lift mechanism elicits a promising region conditioned
on the current multiobjective preference and BO state. The
region is represented by feasible anchors, and the GP posterior
cross-covariance propagates this structured language prior into
a bounded acquisition-time mean adjustment. The resulting
lifted EI changes candidate ranking during the early search
while leaving the fitted GP posterior, uncertainty estimate,
observations, and Pareto relation unchanged.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as
follows:
• We propose LLMBO-MO, an LLM-guided multiobjective
Bayesian optimization framework for lithium-ion battery
charging-protocol design. The framework incorporates
battery-domain knowledge encoded in an LLM into the
BO process while preserving BO as the main numeri-
cal optimization framework, providing additional prior
information for charging-protocol search under a limited
evaluation budget.
• We develop an LLM-informed initialization strategy that
uses an LLM to generate promising and decision-space-
diverse initial charging protocols based on charging
variables, physical constraints, and battery-domain knowl-
edge. This strategy aims to improve the quality of the
initial design compared with uninformed initialization and
thereby alleviate the cold-start problem of BO.
• We introduce a posterior-covariance Region-Lift mecha-
nism that maps a weight-conditioned LLM region into a
portfolio of feasible anchors and uses GP posterior cross-
covariance to construct a bounded, early-stage acquisi-
tion mean shift. This provides an explicit mathematical
interface from a structured language prior to candidate
ranking, with a strict fallback to standard EI whenever
the preference is unavailable, inadmissible, or numerically
degenerate.
• We
conduct
systematic
multiobjective
charging-
optimization experiments and compare LLMBO-MO
with representative multiobjective BO methods. Ablation
experiments
are
further
performed
to
investigate
the
respective
contributions
of
the
LLM-informed
initialization
and
posterior-covariance
Region-Lift

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TRANSPORTATION ELECTRIFICATION
3
Fig. 1. Fast-charging multiobjective design problem.
mechanisms under a limited simulation-evaluation budget.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II formulates the multiobjective fast-charging problem
and introduces the corresponding charging-protocol parame-
terization. Section III presents the battery simulation model
and the associated degradation model. Section IV develops
the proposed LLMBO-MO framework, including the LLM-
informed initialization and posterior-covariance Region-Lift
mechanisms. Section V presents the experimental results and
ablation studies. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper.
II. PROBLEM FORMULATION
The fast-charging design problem is formulated as a con-
strained multiobjective optimization problem. A candidate
solution is a multistage constant-current (MCC) charging
protocol, and its performance is evaluated in terms of charging
time, thermal response, and charging-induced aging. Fig. 1
summarizes the decision variables, objectives, and operating
constraints.
A. Multistage Constant-Current Protocol
A K-stage MCC protocol divides the charging process into
K constant-current stages. Stage k is described by the charging
current Ik and the corresponding SOC increment ∆sk. The
battery is charged from the initial SOC s0 to the target SOC
sf . The independent decision variables are collected in
θ = [I1,...,IK,∆s1,...,∆sK−1]⊤
(1)
where the SOC increment of the final stage is determined by
∆sK = s f −s0 −
K−1
∑
k=1
∆sk
(2)
Each current and SOC increment is restricted to a prescribed
interval, and ∆sK is required to remain above a small positive
lower bound so that the final charging stage is well defined.
Following previous BO-based charging studies [7], [8], [26],
SOC increments are optimized instead of stage durations. Once
Ik and ∆sk are specified, the duration of stage k is determined
by the delivered charge. The total charging time is therefore
tc(θ) = 3600Qeff
K
∑
k=1
∆sk
Ik
(3)
where Qeff is the effective cell capacity in Ah and the factor
3600 converts hours to seconds. The experiments use K = 3.
B. Constrained Multiobjective Charging Design
For a charging protocol θ, the three minimized objectives
are charging time tc(θ), peak temperature rise Tp(θ), and aging
indicator Qs(θ):
min
θ
f(θ) = [tc(θ), Tp(θ), Qs(θ)]⊤
(4)
The latter two objectives are defined by the battery model in
Section III. In addition to the decision-variable bounds, the
simulated charging trajectory must satisfy
U(t;θ) ≤Umax,
T(t;θ) ≤Tmax,
0 ≤t ≤tc(θ)
(5)
where Umax and Tmax are the prescribed voltage and temperature
limits. A protocol that violates either limit or fails to reach sf
is treated as infeasible and is excluded from the Pareto set.
The three objectives are conflicting. Increasing the charging
current can reduce tc, but generally increases the thermal and
aging costs. The desired trade-off also depends on the operating
requirement. The optimization target is therefore a feasible
Pareto set rather than a single charging protocol defined by a
fixed preference.
III. ELECTROCHEMICAL–THERMAL–AGING MODEL
A. Electrochemical Model
The electrochemical dynamics are described by the Single
Particle Model with electrolyte dynamics (SPMe). The SPMe
retains solid-phase diffusion, electrolyte transport, and inter-
facial reaction kinetics while reducing the computational cost
relative to a full porous-electrode model. The terminal voltage
is calculated as
U = Ueq +ηr +ηd +∆Φ
(6)
where U is the terminal voltage, Ueq is the equilibrium
potential, ηr is the ohmic overpotential, ηd is the concentration
overpotential, and ∆Φ is the average potential difference in the
electrolyte. The SOC is obtained from the solid-phase lithium
concentration predicted by the SPMe.

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TRANSPORTATION ELECTRIFICATION
4
B. Thermal Model
The cylindrical cell is described by a lumped thermal model,
ρeff
∂T
∂t = ¯Q−hA
V (T −Ta)
(7)
where ρeff is the effective volumetric heat capacity, T is the
cell temperature, ¯Q is the average heat-generation rate, h is the
heat-transfer coefficient, A is the heat-dissipation area, V is the
cell volume, and Ta is the ambient temperature. The effective
volumetric heat capacity is
ρeff = ∑k ρkCp,kLk
∑k Lk
(8)
where ρk, Cp,k, and Lk are the density, specific heat capacity,
and thickness of component k, respectively. The index k covers
the negative current collector, negative electrode, separator,
positive electrode, and positive current collector.
The thermal objective in Eq. (9) is the maximum temperature
rise during charging,
Tp(θ) =
max
0≤t≤tc(θ)[T(t)−T0]
(9)
where T0 is the initial cell temperature.
C. Aging Model
Charging-induced degradation is evaluated using the same
semi-empirical aging model as EIMO. The normalized capacity-
loss indicator is
Qs(ξ,Ah) = σfun(ξ)Ahz
(10)
where ξ = (SOC,I,T) contains the average SOC, current, and
temperature during charging, Ah is the charge throughput, z is
the power-law exponent, and σfun is the severity-factor function.
The severity factor is
σfun(ξ) = (α SOC+β)exp
(︃
−Ea +ηaI
Rgas(273.15+T)
)︃
(11)
where α and β describe the SOC dependence, ηa describes
the current dependence, Ea is the activation energy, and Rgas
is the universal gas constant.
The quantity Qs is used as a relative degradation indicator for
comparing charging protocols, rather than as a direct prediction
of battery end-of-life. A smaller Qs therefore indicates a smaller
degradation contribution from one charging process.
Together, the electrochemical, thermal, and aging models
provide the objective values {tc,Tp,Qs} and determine whether
a protocol satisfies the voltage and temperature constraints.
These simulator outputs are the only objective and feasibility
information used by the optimizer. Since each new protocol
requires one battery simulation, indiscriminate exploration is
costly. This directly motivates the LLMBO-MO framework in
the next section: Bayesian optimization remains responsible
for numerical search, while the LLM is used only to improve
where the limited simulation budget is spent.
Fig. 2. Structure of the proposed LLMBO-MO framework
IV. PROPOSED LLMBO-MO
A. Framework
The battery model in Section III makes it possible to
evaluate a charging protocol, but each evaluation requires an
electrochemical–thermal–aging simulation. The optimization
problem is therefore governed by a limited simulation budget.
Bayesian optimization (BO) is suitable for this setting because
it uses previously evaluated protocols to guide subsequent
sampling. Its main difficulty appears at the beginning of the
search, when only a few task-specific observations are available
and the surrogate is strongly affected by the initial design.
LLMBO-MO uses battery knowledge expressed in natural
language to improve this early stage while retaining a numerical
multiobjective BO procedure as the optimizer. The LLM is
used in two places. Before sequential BO, it proposes candidate
protocols for the initial design. After the initial database has
been formed, it can provide a temporary preference over the
decision space according to the current multiobjective trade-
off. In both cases, the LLM affects only where the optimizer
searches. Objective values, feasibility, surrogate fitting, and
Pareto updates are always determined from simulator-evaluated
protocols.
The overall procedure is shown in Fig. 2. An initial database
D is first constructed from a mixture of screened LLM proposals
and random valid protocols. During iteration t, a trade-off
weight w(t) defines the current scalar subproblem. A Gaussian
process (GP) is fitted to the scalarized observations, and
expected improvement (EI) is optimized to select the next
protocol. During the first TL iterations, an accepted LLM
region can modify the acquisition ranking through the posterior
covariance of the fitted GP. The selected protocol is then
evaluated by the battery model and appended to D, after which
the feasible Pareto archive P is updated. This loop continues
until the simulation budget is exhausted.
B. Decomposition-Based Multiobjective BO
The numerical backbone follows a decomposition-based
multiobjective BO strategy [14], [26]. A set of nonnegative
weight vectors W is generated in advance to represent different

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TRANSPORTATION ELECTRIFICATION
5
trade-offs among charging time, temperature rise, and aging.
At iteration t, one vector w(t) = [w(t)
1 ,w(t)
2 ,w(t)
3 ] is selected from
W, where ∑3
i=1 w(t)
i
= 1.
Because the three objectives have different numerical ranges,
charging time and aging are first transformed,
y1(θ) = logtc(θ)
tref
,y2(θ) = Tp(θ),y3(θ) = logQs(θ)
Qref
(12)
where tref and Qref are fixed positive reference values. A small
positive floor is used before taking the logarithm. For each
objective, the scaling factor si,t is taken from a prescribed
global range during the first few iterations and is replaced by
the observed range once sufficient variation has been seen. This
avoids over-amplifying an artificially narrow range at the start
of the optimization.
The normalized distance from the current best observation
is
¯fi,t(θ) =
|yi(θ)−z∗
i,t|
si,t
i = 1,2,3
(13)
where z∗
i,t is the best observed value of the ith transformed
objective. The three objectives are then combined using the
augmented Tchebycheff function,
gt(θ) = max
i=1,2,3
{︂
w(t)
i
¯fi,t(θ)
}︂
+ρ
3
∑
i=1
w(t)
i
¯fi,t(θ)
(14)
where ρ > 0 is a small augmentation coefficient. Changing w(t)
across iterations therefore directs the search toward different
parts of the Pareto front.
An ARD Matérn-5/2 GP is fitted to the scalarized obser-
vations. Let µt(θ) and σt(θ) denote its posterior mean and
standard deviation. For the minimization problem, EI is written
as
EIt(θ) =
(︁
gbest
t
−µt(θ)
)︁
Φ(ut)+σt(θ)φ(ut)
(15)
ut = gbest
t
−µt(θ)
σt(θ)
(16)
where gbest
t
is the best scalarized value among the evaluated
protocols, and Φ(·) and φ(·) are the standard normal cumulative
distribution and density functions. Maximizing EIt(θ) gives
the next protocol to be evaluated. This scalarization–GP–EI
loop is used throughout the complete simulation budget.
C. LLM-Informed Initialization
Before the first GP is available, BO must rely on a small
initial set of evaluated protocols. Random initialization provides
broad coverage but does not use readily available knowledge
about multistage charging. We therefore use the LLM to convert
this qualitative knowledge into candidate protocols. The prompt
specifies the battery context, MCC structure, decision-variable
bounds, optimization objectives, and charging-related prior
knowledge. The LLM returns a pool of numerical candidates
together with a heuristic score used only for ranking.
The generated protocols are checked before any battery
simulation is carried out. Non-numerical, non-finite, and
duplicate outputs are removed; values outside the decision
bounds are repaired; and protocols that cannot complete the
prescribed SOC interval are rejected. These operations only
verify the protocol representation. Voltage and temperature
constraints are still determined by the battery model.
The remaining candidates are selected using
J(θ) = h(θ)−ωpp(θ)+ωmm(θ)+ωdd(θ)
(17)
where h(θ) is the LLM ranking score, p(θ) penalizes an
undesirably small terminal SOC span, m(θ) represents the
preferred current ordering, and d(θ) measures diversity with
respect to protocols already selected for the initial set. Random
valid protocols are added to the selected LLM proposals so
that the initial design does not depend entirely on the language
prior.
All initial protocols are then evaluated by the battery model.
Only these simulator-evaluated records are added to D and
used for GP fitting and Pareto updating. Thus, the initialization
mechanism changes the locations of the first evaluations without
introducing LLM-generated objective values.
D. Posterior-Covariance Region Lift
The initialization mechanism is used before sequential BO
begins. Once the initial database has been formed, the LLM
can also use the current optimization state to provide a short-
lived regional preference. At iteration t, the prompt contains
the active trade-off weight w(t), the observed objective ranges,
current best values, and representative evaluated protocols. The
weight vector is included because the preferred region should
change with the scalar subproblem currently being optimized.
The LLM may return a point, a bounded region, or no
preference. A returned point is expanded to a local region,
while a returned region is clipped to the valid decision space.
Invalid, excessively small, or excessively broad regions are
ignored. The reported confidence ˆ︁ct is used only as a reliability
weight; if it falls below a prescribed threshold, standard EI is
used without modification.
An accepted region is represented by M Sobol anchors
{g1,t,...,gM,t} with equal weights vj,t = 1/M. These anchors
are not evaluated by the battery model. Instead, the fitted GP
determines how strongly an arbitrary candidate is related to
the preferred region. Let ˜︁ΣGG,t denote the posterior covariance
among the anchors and ˜︁ΣθG,t the posterior cross-covariance
between a candidate θ and the anchor set, both in the
standardized scalar-GP space. The variance associated with the
regional anchor portfolio is
VG,t = v⊤
t ˜︁ΣGG,tvt
(18)
If VG,t is numerically negligible, the regional preference is
discarded.
The raw acquisition-time shift is then defined by
δ (0)
t
(θ) = αcˆ︁ctat
˜︁ΣθG,tvt
√︁VG,t
,
at = max
(︃
1−t −1
TL
,0
)︃
(19)
where αc calibrates the strength of the regional preference and
at reduces its influence to zero by the end of the guidance
window. The covariance term is signed: candidates positively
correlated with the preferred region receive a favorable shift,
whereas negatively correlated candidates are discouraged.

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TRANSPORTATION ELECTRIFICATION
6
Algorithm 1 LLMBO-MO
Require: Battery simulator, LLM, total budget N, initial budget n0, weight
set W, guidance horizon TL
Ensure: Feasible Pareto archive P
1: Generate, screen, and rank LLM candidate protocols
2: Combine selected LLM proposals with random valid protocols
3: Evaluate the n0 initial protocols; initialize D and P
4: for t = 1 to N −n0 do
5:
Select w(t) ∈W and compute gt using Eq. (14)
6:
Fit the GP and construct standard EI using Eq. (16)
7:
if t ≤TL then
8:
Query the LLM with w(t) and the current BO state
9:
if an admissible region is returned then
10:
Generate regional anchors and compute µL
t using Eqs. (18)–
(21)
11:
end if
12:
end if
13:
Maximize the active EI over the full decision space and select θt+1
14:
Evaluate θt+1 with the battery model and append the result to D
15:
Update the feasible Pareto archive P
16: end for
17: return P
To prevent the regional preference from dominating the
data-driven model, the raw shift is rescaled by
κt = min
{︃
1, Bmean
¯δt
, Bmax
δ max
t
}︃
(20)
where ¯δt and δ max
t
are, respectively, the mean and maximum
absolute raw shifts evaluated at the anchors. The bounded shift
is δt(θ) = clip(κtδ (0)
t
(θ),−Bmax,Bmax).
The shift is used only when the acquisition function is
evaluated. If sg,t denotes the standardization scale of the scalar
GP target, the mean used for acquisition ranking is
µL
t (θ) = µt(θ)−sg,tδt(θ),
σL
t (θ) = σt(θ)
(21)
EI is then evaluated using µL
t in place of µt in Eq. (16). The
GP itself is not refitted, no pseudo-observations are introduced,
and the posterior variance is unchanged. The full decision
space also remains available to the acquisition optimizer. If
the LLM abstains, the region fails the admissibility checks, its
confidence is too low, or VG,t is degenerate, then δt(θ) = 0
and the method reduces to standard EI. Standard EI is also
used after t > TL.
Algorithm 1 summarizes the complete procedure.
V. NUMERICAL VALIDATION AND DISCUSSION
This section evaluates LLMBO-MO on the fast-charging
problem defined in Section II. All protocols are evaluated using
the electrochemical–thermal–aging model in Section III. We
first compare LLMBO-MO with representative multiobjective
optimizers under the same simulation budget. The available
ablation studies are then used to examine LLM-informed
initialization and the regional-guidance branch, followed by a
descriptive comparison across LLM backends and an analysis
of representative Pareto-optimal charging protocols.
A. Experimental Setup
The Chen2020 parameterization of the LG INR21700-M50
cell [18] is used as the primary case, while Ecker2015 [19]
is additionally considered to assess robustness across battery
TABLE I
BATTERY AND SIMULATOR SETTINGS
Parameter
Value
Primary parameterization
Chen2020, LG
INR21700-M50
Additional parameterization
Ecker2015
Chen2020 nominal capacity
5.0 Ah
Chen2020 cell voltage range
2.50–4.20 V
Chen2020 cell format
21700 cylindrical, 70 ×
21 mm
Initial/ambient temperature
298.15 K
Maximum cell temperature
328.15 K
TABLE II
MAIN PARAMETER SETTINGS OF LLMBO-MO
Parameter
Value
Total simulator budget
56
Number of trials
5
Initial LLM candidate pool
15
Selected fraction of LLM candidates
0.2
Soft-penalty weight ωp
0.20
Monotonicity weight ωm
0.10
Diversity weight ωd
0.30
Preferred terminal SOC span ∆ssoft
K
0.10
Region-Lift horizon TL
12
Number of regional anchors M
32
Confidence gate cmin
0.60
Confidence scale αc
0.25
Mean/max shift budgets
0.05 / 0.15
Tchebycheff coefficient ρaug
0.05
Objective-scale ratio ρR
0.30
parameterizations. For each charging protocol, the three objec-
tives are charging time tc, peak temperature rise Tp, and aging
indicator Qs. The main comparison uses six initial evaluations
followed by 50 optimization iterations, giving 56 battery-model
evaluations per run. Five matched trials are used for all methods
in the main comparison.
Hypervolume (HV) is adopted as the main multiobjective
performance metric. Because the true Pareto front is unknown,
HV is used to assess both convergence and diversity of the non-
dominated set; a larger HV indicates a better solution set under
the same reference point. Within each battery parameterization,
all methods use the same objective definitions, simulation
budget, and HV calculation. The battery and algorithm settings
are summarized in Tables I and II.
Four competitors are considered. ParEGO is the primary BO
baseline because it shares the decomposition–GP structure of
the numerical backbone used in LLMBO-MO [14]. DISK and
PIMD are included as recent surrogate-assisted multiobjective
optimizers [23], [24], while NSGA-II provides a classical
evolutionary baseline [15].
B. Performance Comparison
Figure 3 shows the HV trajectories on Chen2020, and
Table III reports the final values. LLMBO-MO reaches higher
HV during the early part of the search and retains the largest
mean HV at the end of the 56-evaluation budget.
After 56 evaluations, LLMBO-MO achieves a mean HV of
0.3848 ± 0.0073, compared with 0.3520 ± 0.0169 for ParEGO,

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TRANSPORTATION ELECTRIFICATION
7
Fig. 3. HV trajectories of the five methods on Chen2020.
TABLE III
FINAL HV ON CHEN2020
Method
Final HV (mean ± SD) ↑
LLMBO-MO
0.3848 ± 0.0073
ParEGO
0.3520 ± 0.0169
NSGA-II
0.3265 ± 0.0220
DISK
0.3085 ± 0.0267
PIMD
0.2941 ± 0.0195
Fig. 4. HV trajectories of LLMBO-MO and ParEGO on Ecker2015.
corresponding to a 9.3% improvement. Its final mean HV is also
higher than those of NSGA-II, DISK, and PIMD. The advantage
appears before the simulation budget is exhausted, consistent
with the intended role of LLM-informed initialization: battery-
domain knowledge is introduced when only a small number
of task-specific observations are available.
To determine whether the advantage over ParEGO is specific
to Chen2020, the comparison is repeated using Ecker2015.
Figure 4 and Table IV show the results.At evaluation 56, they
reach 0.5605 ± 0.0008 and 0.4760 ± 0.0039. The advantage
over ParEGO is therefore also observed under the Ecker2015
parameterization.
TABLE IV
HV COMPARISON ON ECKER2015
Method
Evaluation 56
ParEGO
0.4760 ± 0.0039
LLMBO-MO
0.5605 ± 0.0008
TABLE V
EFFECT OF DIFFERENT INITIALIZATION STRATEGIES
Initialization
Final HV (mean ± SD) ↑
Random
0.31062 ± 0.04303
Generic prompt
0.31371 ± 0.04675
Battery-specific prompt
0.36890 ± 0.00824
TABLE VI
ABLATION RESULTS ON CHEN2020
Variant
Final HV (mean ± SD) ↑
No LLM
0.2907 ± 0.0451
+ Initialization
0.3462 ± 0.0109
+ Regional guidance
0.2980 ± 0.0462
LLMBO-MO
0.3500 ± 0.0039
C. Ablation Study
The preceding comparison evaluates the complete LLMBO-
MO framework. We next use the ablation studies to determine
which part of the LLM assistance is most clearly supported
by the current evidence.
1) LLM-Informed Initialization: The first study compares
three initialization strategies: random initialization, a detailed
generic prompt, and a battery-specific prompt. Ten matched
trials are used, and all three variants follow the same numerical
BO procedure after initialization. The final HV values under a
26-evaluation budget are reported in Table V.
The generic prompt performs similarly to random initializa-
tion. In contrast, the battery-specific prompt increases the mean
final HV by 0.05828 and substantially reduces the variation
among trials. The paired difference remains significant after
Holm correction (p = 0.005859). These results indicate that
the gain is associated with battery-specific information in the
prompt rather than with prompting alone.
2) Regional Guidance: The second study compares four
variants under the same short budget: the numerical BO
backbone without LLM assistance, LLM-informed initialization
only, regional guidance only, and the complete LLMBO-MO
framework. Each run contains six initial evaluations followed
by ten BO iterations.
This experiment evaluates the regional-guidance branch at
the system level; it is not a matched Region-Lift on/off test
with otherwise identical regional preferences. The results are
therefore used to assess the practical effect of the available
regional-guidance branch, not to claim an independent causal
gain from the posterior-covariance lift itself.
Initialization provides the main improvement in this short-
budget study: the mean HV increases from 0.2907 to 0.3462.
Regional guidance alone gives a smaller change, reaching
0.2980. With both components enabled, LLMBO-MO obtains
the largest mean HV, 0.3500, and the smallest dispersion among

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TRANSPORTATION ELECTRIFICATION
8
Fig. 5. Final HV of the four ablation variants on Chen2020.
TABLE VII
HV OBTAINED WITH DIFFERENT LLM BACKENDS
Backend
Initial HV
HV at 15
Final HV
DeepSeek-V4-Flash
0.341225
0.373845
0.385986
DeepSeek-V4-Pro
0.345274
0.372526
0.387931
GLM-5.3-Flash
0.346248
0.372527
0.385324
the four variants. The available evidence therefore identifies
LLM-informed initialization as the more stable source of
improvement. A dedicated matched experiment is still required
to isolate the independent contribution of the finalized Region-
Lift.
D. Sensitivity to the LLM Backend
A supplementary experiment compares three LLM backends
under the same Chen2020 prompt and numerical BO settings.
This comparison is intended as a descriptive assessment of
backend sensitivity rather than a statistical comparison.
The three backends produce similar final HV values, ranging
from 0.385324 to 0.387931. This single-seed result does
not support a statistical comparison among backends, but it
indicates that the observed behavior is not unique to one LLM
implementation.
E. Analysis of Pareto-Optimal Charging Protocols
HV summarizes the overall quality of the nondominated set,
whereas the practical output of the optimizer is a collection
of charging protocols. We therefore select three representative
solutions from the Chen2020 Pareto set to examine their
objective-space trade-offs and charging trajectories. Figure 6
shows their locations in objective space, and Table VIII lists
the corresponding protocol parameters.
Protocol A represents the fast-charging end of the Pareto
set. Its first two stages use high currents, giving the shortest
charging time of 2880 s, but also the largest temperature rise
and aging indicator among the three representative solutions.
Protocol C uses a constant 2 A current and requires 7200 s to
reach the target SOC, while giving the smallest temperature
rise. Protocol B lies between these cases and provides an
intermediate compromise. The three solutions illustrate the
Charging Time / s
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
Temperature Rise / K
2
3
4
5
6
7
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
Degradation / a.u.
LLMBO-MO
A
B
C
        I1/I2/I3 (A)        s1/ s2/ s3
  A     6.00/5.00/3.00       0.40/0.30/0.10
  B     2.78/2.00/3.00       0.21/0.10/0.49
  C     2.00/2.00/2.00       0.24/0.15/0.40
Fig. 6. Representative Pareto-optimal charging protocols on Chen2020.
0
2000
4000
6000
Time / s
2.75
3.00
3.25
3.50
3.75
4.00
4.25
Voltage / V
(a)
Protocol A
Protocol B
Protocol C
0
2000
4000
6000
Time / s
298
300
302
304
306
Temperature / K
(b)
0
2000
4000
6000
Time / s
2
3
4
5
6
Input Current / A
(c)
0
2000
4000
6000
Time / s
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
State of Charge
(d)
Fig. 7. Charging trajectories of protocols A–C on Chen2020.
expected trade-off: increasing charging current reduces charging
time but generally increases thermal and aging costs.
The corresponding charging trajectories are shown in Fig. 7.
Protocol A reaches the target SOC first and exhibits the largest
temperature increase. Protocol C charges more slowly and
maintains the lowest temperature, while Protocol B gives an
intermediate response. All three protocols remain below the
prescribed voltage limit.
Overall, the numerical results support two conclusions. First,
LLMBO-MO achieves the highest final mean HV among the
five methods compared on Chen2020, and its advantage over
ParEGO is also observed under Ecker2015. Second, the ablation
studies identify battery-specific initialization as the clearest
empirical source of improvement in the current evidence.
The independent contribution of the finalized Region-Lift

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TRANSPORTATION ELECTRIFICATION
9
TABLE VIII
REPRESENTATIVE PARETO-OPTIMAL CHARGING PROTOCOLS
Protocol
I1/I2/I3/∆s1/∆s2/∆s3
tc (s)
Tp (K)
Qs
A
6.000/5.000/3.000/0.400/0.300/0.100
2880
7.567
1.261
B
2.782/2.000/3.000/0.211/0.100/0.489
5199
3.069
0.680
C
2.000/2.000/2.000/0.245/0.153/0.403
7200
1.528
0.640
should be assessed through a strictly matched mechanism-level
experiment.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper proposed LLMBO-MO for multiobjective battery
fast-charging protocol design under a limited simulation budget.
The method retains a decomposition-based multiobjective
Bayesian optimization framework as the numerical optimizer
and introduces LLM knowledge only during the data-scarce
stage of the search. LLM-informed initialization converts
battery-domain knowledge into a screened and diverse set
of initial charging protocols, while the posterior-covariance
Region-Lift mechanism uses an accepted, weight-conditioned
regional preference to adjust acquisition ranking during the
early BO iterations. In both mechanisms, the LLM affects
only the search preference; objective values, feasibility, GP
fitting, and Pareto updates are determined exclusively from
battery-model evaluations.
Under a budget of 56 simulator evaluations, LLMBO-MO
achieves a mean final HV of 0.3848 ± 0.0073 on Chen2020,
compared with 0.3520 ± 0.0169 for ParEGO, corresponding to
a 9.3% improvement. A similar advantage is observed under
the Ecker2015 parameterization, where the final HV improves
by 17.8%. LLMBO-MO also attains a higher final HV than
NSGA-II, DISK, and PIMD under the same evaluation budget.
The initialization study further shows that battery-specific
prompt information provides a clear benefit over random
initialization and a domain-agnostic prompt. The component
ablation indicates that initialization accounts for most of the
observed improvement, whereas the current experiments do
not provide sufficient evidence to claim a separate systematic
gain from Region-Lift. The representative Pareto protocols
also exhibit the expected trade-offs among charging time,
temperature rise, and the aging indicator. These results suggest
that LLM knowledge is most useful as an early search prior,
while the numerical BO process should remain responsible for
the subsequent optimization.
The present study is limited to simulation-based evaluation.
The adopted electrochemical–thermal–aging model captures
the main charging dynamics but does not represent all spatially
localized degradation and thermal effects, and Qs is a model-
based aging indicator rather than a measured capacity-fade
endpoint. In addition, the numerical validation covers two
battery parameterizations, while the comparison across LLM
backends is limited to a single-seed descriptive study. Future
work will therefore focus on controlled multi-seed ablations
of Region-Lift, broader studies of LLM backends and prompt
designs, extension to a wider range of battery chemistries and
operating conditions, and validation on physical cells with
experimentally measured degradation.
REFERENCES
[1] F. Wu, J. Maier, and Y. Yu, “Guidelines and trends for next-generation
rechargeable lithium and lithium-ion batteries,” Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020.
[2] K. Liu, C. Zou, K. Li, and T. Wik, “Charging pattern optimiza-
tion for lithium-ion batteries with an electrothermal-aging model,”
IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 14, no. 12, pp. 5463–5474, 2018,
doi:10.1109/TII.2018.2866493.
[3] P. M. Attia et al., “Closed-loop optimization of fast-charging protocols
for batteries with machine learning,” Nature, vol. 578, pp. 397–402,
2020, doi:10.1038/s41586-020-1994-5.
[4] G. Hwang et al., “Model predictive control of lithium-ion batteries:
Development of optimal charging profile for reduced intracycle capacity
fade,” Chem. Eng. J., vol. 435, Art. no. 134768, 2022.
[5] Z. Xiong et al., “Multiobjective battery charging strategy based on deep
reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Transp. Electrific., vol. 10, no. 3,
pp. 6893–6903, 2024, doi:10.1109/TTE.2023.3347297.
[6] B. Shahriari et al., “Taking the human out of the loop: A review of
Bayesian optimization,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 104, no. 1, pp. 148–175, 2016.
[7] B. Jiang et al., “Fast charging design for lithium-ion batteries via Bayesian
optimization,” Appl. Energy, vol. 307, Art. no. 118244, 2022.
[8] X. Wang and B. Jiang, “Multi-objective optimization for fast charg-
ing design of lithium-ion batteries using constrained Bayesian op-
timization,” J. Power Sources, vol. 584, Art. no. 233602, 2023,
doi:10.1016/j.jpowsour.2023.233602.
[9] A. Ramachandran et al., “Incorporating expert prior in Bayesian optimi-
sation via space warping,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 195, Art. no. 105663,
2020.
[10] D. Eriksson, M. Pearce, J. Gardner, R. Turner, and M. Poloczek, “Scalable
global optimization via local Bayesian optimization,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., 2019.
[11] N. Namura and S. Takemori, “Regional expected improvement for
efficient trust region selection in high-dimensional Bayesian optimization,”
in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 39, no. 18, pp. 19624–19632,
2025.
[12] T. Liu, N. Astorga, N. Seedat, and M. van der Schaar, “Large language
models to enhance Bayesian optimization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
Represent., 2024, [Online].
[13] C. Yang et al., “Large language models as optimizers,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Learn. Represent., 2024.
[14] J. Knowles, “ParEGO: A hybrid algorithm with on-line landscape
approximation for expensive multiobjective optimization problems,” IEEE
Trans. Evol. Comput., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 50–66, 2006.
[15] K. Deb, A. Pratap, S. Agarwal, and T. Meyarivan, “A fast and elitist
multiobjective genetic algorithm: NSGA-II,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput.,
vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 182–197, 2002.
[16] S. G. Marquis, V. Sulzer, R. Timms, C. P. Please, and S. J. Chapman,
“An asymptotic derivation of a single particle model with electrolyte,” J.
Electrochem. Soc., vol. 166, no. 15, pp. A3693–A3706, 2019.
[17] V. Sulzer et al., “Python Battery Mathematical Modelling (PyBaMM),”
J. Open Res. Softw., vol. 9, no. 1, Art. no. 14, 2021.
[18] C.-H. Chen, F. Brosa Planella, K. O’Regan, D. Gastol, W. D. Widanage,
and E. Kendrick, “Development of experimental techniques for param-
eterization of multi-scale lithium-ion battery models,” J. Electrochem.
Soc., vol. 167, no. 8, Art. no. 080534, 2020.
[19] M. Ecker, T. K. D. Tran, P. Dechent, S. Käbitz, A. Warnecke, and
D. U. Sauer, “Parameterization of a physico-chemical model of a
lithium-ion battery: I. Determination of parameters,” J. Electrochem.
Soc., vol. 162, no. 9, pp. A1836–A1848, 2015.
[20] J. G. Falcón-Cardona, H. Ishibuchi, and C. A. Coello Coello, “Riesz
s-energy-based reference sets for multi-objective optimization,” in Proc.
IEEE Congr. Evol. Comput., pp. 1–8, 2020.
[21] X. Kuai, J.-H. Ren, B.-C. Wang, and Y. Feng, “Large language model-
enhanced Bayesian optimization for parameter identification of lithium-
ion batteries,” J. Energy Storage, vol. 135, Art. no. 118198, 2025,
doi:10.1016/j.est.2025.118198.

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TRANSPORTATION ELECTRIFICATION
10
[22] G. Suri and S. Onori, “A control-oriented cycle-life model for hybrid
electric vehicle lithium-ion batteries,” Energy, vol. 96, pp. 644–653,
2016.
[23] Z. Zhang, Y. Wang, G. Sun, and T. Pang, “A distribution information-
based Kriging-assisted evolutionary algorithm for expensive many-
objective optimization problems,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., vol. 29,
no. 6, pp. 2656–2670, 2025.
[24] Y. Li, W. Li, S. Li, and Y. Zhao, “An infill sampling criterion based on
improvement of probability and mapping crowding distance for expensive
multi/many-objective optimization,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 133,
Art. no. 108616, 2024.
[25] B.-C. Wang, Y.-Y. Mao, Y. Wang, and H.-X. Li, “Gaussian process-
accelerated multiobjective evolutionary design of charging process
considering multiple user preferences,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
vol. 20, no. 8, pp. 10123–10133, 2024, doi:10.1109/TII.2024.3388602.
[26] B.-C. Wang, R. Wang, Y.-Y. Mao, and H.-X. Li, “Experience-
informed
multiobjective
optimization
for
fast
charging
design
of lithium-ion batteries,” IEEE Trans. Transp. Electrific., 2026,
doi:10.1109/TTE.2026.3610481.
