1
Experience-Informed Multiobjective Optimization
for Fast Charging Design of Lithium-Ion Batteries
Abstract—The design of charging protocols for lithium-ion
batteries that satisfy diverse user requirements has become
an important research topic. Although model-based optimiza-
tion is more cost-effective than experiment-driven approaches,
battery simulations remain computationally expensive. Bayesian
optimization has recently shown strong potential for charging
design due to its ability to exploit information from historical
evaluations. Bayesian optimization is inherently data-driven and
typically treats each optimization task independently. However, in
battery charging applications, the optimal charging protocol must
evolve with the battery’s state of health (SOH). Re-optimizing
from scratch at each SOH level ignores previously acquired
optimization experience and leads to significant computational
redundancy. To address this challenge, this paper proposes an
experience-informed multiobjective optimization (EIMO) algo-
rithm that transfers optimization experience from higher SOH
levels to the current SOH level. EIMO uses Bayesian optimization
to reduce the number of required simulations and represents
accumulated experience as a probability distribution. A transfer
acquisition function is developed to incorporate this experience
and accelerate the search for optimal charging strategies. Exten-
sive simulations and experiments demonstrate that EIMO can
efficiently obtain high-quality charging protocols that balance
user demands while satisfying safety and longevity constraints.
Compared with a popular and efficient multiobjective algorithm
for expensive optimization (i.e., ParEGO), EIMO reduces the
computational time by 45.15%, 41.81%, and 39.24% in the
three representative cases, respectively, while achieving higher
hypervolume values.
Note to Practitioners—This work aims to support the practical
development of intelligent charging strategies for lithium-ion
batteries. In real applications, charging protocols must adapt
to changing user requirements and evolving battery degrada-
tion states. Although Bayesian optimization is data-driven and
sample-efficient, it typically treats each optimization problem
as an independent task. Directly re-optimizing the protocol at
every SOH is rarely feasible due to the high computational
cost associated with battery simulation. The proposed EIMO
algorithm addresses this issue by reusing optimization experi-
ence obtained at earlier SOH levels. Engineers can treat such
historical experience as transferable knowledge that accelerates
the design process without compromising safety constraints. The
approach integrates Bayesian optimization and experience trans-
fer, enabling practitioners to generate efficient and physically
compliant charging strategies with significantly fewer simulation
evaluations. This framework is suitable for applications such as
fast charging system development, adaptive battery management
systems, and the design of personalized charging services. In fu-
ture work, we will integrate Bayesian optimization with transfer
learning for charge balancing in battery packs.
Index Terms—Lithium-ion battery, charging design, experi-
ence, Bayesian optimization, transfer learning
I. INTRODUCTION
As a representative of innovative energy storage devices,
lithium-ion batteries have been widely used due to their excel-
lent performance and environmentally friendly properties [1]–
[3]. However, the long charging time caused by slow charging
and the degradation caused by fast charging remain critical
issues that hinder the further promotion and development
of lithium-ion batteries. To this end, the design of charging
protocols for lithium-ion batteries has become a hot research
topic recently [4], [5]. The design process is inherently a
constrained multiobjective optimization problem (CMOP), as
it involves considering diverse user demands and is subject
to certain restrictions [6]. The development of an accurate
electrochemical-thermal-aging model is essential to assess
various charging protocols, given the resource-intensive nature
of experiment-based evaluations [7]. However, simulating an
electrochemical-thermal-aging model is time-consuming due
to its reliance on a set of coupled partial differential equations
(PDEs) and algebraic equations [8]. Additionally, in many
scenarios, the optimal charging protocols for a lithium-ion
battery vary at different state of health (SOH) levels. For
example, since the SOH of batteries can vary across different
charging stations, the optimal dynamic charging strategy for
electric vehicle fleets should take this variation into account
[9]. Therefore, it is inefficient to repeatedly determine the
optimal charging protocols for an operating battery from
scratch.
In recent times, many attempts have been made to accelerate
the design process. The equivalent circuit model (ECM) uti-
lizes RC pairs to describe the internal polarization reactions
of a lithium-ion battery, thus tracking the battery’s voltages
under different input currents [10]. Due to the absence of
PDE solving, charging design based on ECM is more efficient
compared with methods based on electrochemical models.
Liu et al. [11] leveraged an ECM-thermal-aging model to
design charging protocols in which battery health, charging
time, and energy conversion efficiency are formulated as
objectives. Hu et al. [12] employed an ECM-thermal-aging
model to optimize the charging protocols. This study considers
two conflicting objectives: minimizing charging time and
simultaneously mitigating battery capacity fade. Despite its
computational efficiency, ECM provides limited insights into
the battery’s internal states, which limits the accuracies of the
design process.
Some researchers employed a reduced-order model (ROM)
instead of the full-order version, thereby alleviating the com-
putational load to a certain degree. Lin et al. [13] optimized
charging time and battery degradation through dynamic pro-
gramming, in which an electrolyte-enhanced single particle
model (SPM) is used to capture the electrochemical dynamics
in the battery. Furthermore, Lin et al. [14] proposed a frame-
work to explore the interactions between optimized charging
protocols and battery internal electrochemical kinetics. In this
framework, an SPM is coupled with a lumped parameter

2
thermal model. Zou et al. [15] designed charging protocols by
a linear time-varying model predictive control algorithm. In
this study, an ROM coupled with thermal states is constructed
under several assumptions. Hwang et al. [16] adopted an en-
hanced SPM to develop charging protocols aimed at reducing
intracycle capacity fade.
Recently, deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has been
applied to many interesting fields [17]–[20], including bat-
tery fast charging design, due to its capability for adaptive
decision-making [8], [21], [22]. Xiong et al. [22] developed a
multiobjective DRL method that considers charging duration
and battery overheating as two optimization objectives. Dong
et al. [8] adopted a multiobjective deep Q-network algorithm
for fast charging design, considering the electrical, thermal,
and aging behaviors of the battery. Wei et al. [23] designed
charging protocols using DRL, in which an ROM coupled with
a lumped parameter thermal model is developed and evaluated
on a cloud server. Although DRL exhibits strong adaptation
capability, DRL-based approaches typically require a large
number of training episodes to achieve stable performance.
Such data requirements are often impractical for battery
systems, where each evaluation may involve costly battery
simulations or physical experiments. Thus, these methods are
often implemented in a cloud environment.
From another perspective, several recent studies [4], [24]–
[26] have demonstrated that Bayesian optimization can signifi-
cantly reduce the number of simulation evaluations in charging
design, owing to its ability to perform sample-efficient opti-
mization through surrogate modeling and efficient acquisition
strategies. Jiang et al. [4] employed Bayesian optimization to
design various charging protocols and investigated the impact
of different acquisition functions on convergence. Wang and
Jiang [24] proposed a multiobjective Bayesian optimization
framework for charging design. The multiobjective optimiza-
tion problem is decomposed into single-objective ones us-
ing the Tchebycheff decomposition method. Afterward, these
problems are solved by a constrained acquisition function-
based Bayesian optimization algorithm. Dong et al. [25] pre-
sented a hybrid Bayesian optimization algorithm by combining
mesh grid adaptive search, where various search strategies
and acquisition functions are evaluated across multiple multi-
stage constant charging protocols. While Bayesian optimiza-
tion leverages historical data of the current task to enhance
efficiency, existing studies have not utilized experience data
from other similar scenarios to further accelerate the design
of charging protocols. Indeed, experience data from a lithium-
ion battery at different SOH levels can be carefully collected
and leveraged, since the internal mechanisms of the battery
remain similar throughout its lifespan [27], [28].
From the above literature review, some interesting findings
and insights are summarized as follows:
• In many studies, the charging design is formulated as a
CMOP to satisfy diverse user demands and constraints.
• Model-based algorithms are more cost-effective than
experiment-based methods. However, design algorithms
based on a full-order model are time-consuming, while
those employing a faster model may sacrifice accuracies.
• DRL-based approaches typically require a large number
of training episodes to achieve stable performance, which
is often impractical for battery systems.
• As another promising direction for charging design from
an optimization perspective, Bayesian optimization can
effectively balance optimization efficiency and solution
quality. Moreover, transfer learning can be naturally in-
corporated into the acquisition function.
• Experience data can indeed contribute significantly to
enhancing the efficiency of a design algorithm. However,
to the best of our knowledge, this topic has been scarcely
explored.
Based on these observations, an experience-informed mul-
tiobjective optimization (EIMO) algorithm is proposed to
design charging protocols for lithium-ion batteries. In EIMO,
a decomposition-based multiobjective Bayesian optimization
algorithm is presented to use historical data to accelerate the
design process. Additionally, a distribution-similarity-based
transfer learning technique is developed and integrated into
Bayesian optimization to effectively utilize experience data,
thereby further enhancing the efficiency of the design process.
The main contributions of EIMO are as follows:
• To the best of our knowledge, EIMO is the first attempt
to leverage experience data from other SOH levels to
design charging protocols for lithium-ion batteries at the
current SOH level. The proposed EIMO introduces a
new optimization-based approach, offering a promising
alternative for charging design.
• A distribution-similarity-based transfer learning tech-
nique is developed to formulate the acquisition function,
enabling the effective utilization of both historical data
from the current SOH level and experience data from
other SOH levels.
• By employing the decomposition technique and applying
an evolutionary algorithm to solve the acquisition func-
tion, EIMO is capable of efficiently providing a set of
optimal charging protocols.
• In our study, an electrochemical-thermal-aging model is
presented and validated using real battery data. Based
on this validated model, extensive simulations have been
conducted to demonstrate that EIMO outperforms other
methods in terms of efficiency and accuracy.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section
II introduces the problem formulation. Section III describes
the electrochemical-thermal-aging model used for simulation.
Section IV elaborates on EIMO. Section V presents the
validations and discussions. Finally, the concluding remarks
are provided in Section VI.
II. PROBLEM FORMULATION
As shown in Fig. 1, the charging design problem deter-
mines charging protocols by optimization techniques that take
battery states into consideration. It is always formulated as a
CMOP. The decision variables, objectives, and constraints are
introduced as follows.
Decision Variables: Due to its efficiency [29], the multi-
stage constant current (MCC) protocol is investigated. Specif-

3
Battery states
Optimization 
technique
Optimal charging 
protocol set
Fig. 1. Schematic of charging design.
ically, the decision vector (i.e., solution) includes the cur-
rent rates and the charging capacities for M stages: θ =
[cc1, . . . , cci, . . . , ccM, ∆s1, . . . , ∆si, . . . , ∆sM], where cci
and ∆si, i = 1, . . . , M, denote the current rate and the charg-
ing capacity in the ith stage, respectively. The main reasons
for choosing charging capacity rather than stage duration as
decision variables are as follows. First, the charging design
problem aims to fully charge the battery while satisfying
operational constraints and minimizing the total charging time.
In a multi-stage charging protocol, the total charging time
is simply the sum of the stage durations, which directly
constitutes an objective function. Therefore, stage durations
are outcome variables determined by the charging currents and
capacity allocation, rather than independent decision variables.
Additionally, this setting can enhance physical consistency
and modeling convenience. Specifically, charging capacity is
directly related to the state-of-charge (SOC) evolution of the
battery and allows each charging stage to be naturally defined
in the SOC domain. In contrast, using stage durations as
decision variables would introduce strong coupling with the
charging current, since the delivered capacity depends on both
current and time. In an optimization problem, this coupling
complicates constraint handling and may lead to physically
inconsistent or redundant decision representations. By param-
eterizing each stage using charging capacity, the SOC bound-
aries between stages are explicitly controlled, which simpli-
fies constraint enforcement and improves numerical stability
during optimization. This representation has also been widely
adopted in existing charging design studies [4], [6], [30],
facilitating fair comparison and practical implementation. As
reported in [4], [6], setting M = 3 yields good performance;
therefore, this configuration is adopted in our study.
Objectives: The diverse user demands are formulated as
charging objectives [24]. Generally speaking, these include
time, safety, and sustainability requirements, which can be
represented by minimizing the charging time (denoted as tc),
the temperature rise (denoted as Tp), and the lithium-ion
loss/sustainability indicator (denoted as Qs), respectively:
min f(θ) ={tc, Tp, Qs}
(1)
where θ denotes the decision vector (i.e., charging protocol).
In practical scenarios, these three objectives are inherently
conflicting. While higher currents can shorten charging time,
they also raise battery temperature and accelerate lithium-ion
loss. Besides, user preferences regarding these three objectives
vary across different scenarios. In time-sensitive situations,
minimizing charging time is prioritized, whereas in time-
abundant contexts, safety and battery sustainability become
Fig. 2. Charging design problem.
more important. Furthermore, even within a specific scenario,
users often struggle to precisely quantify their preferences.
Thus, providing a set of Pareto nondominated charging pro-
tocols is promising to accommodate diverse user preferences.
The details of these three objectives can be found in [6].
Constraints: Additionally, the input current (denoted as
I(t)), the terminal voltage (denoted as U(t)), the temperature
(denoted as T(t)), and the SOC (denoted as soc(t)) must
satisfy certain constraints [31]:







Imin ≤I(t) ≤Imax
smin ≤soc(t) ≤smax
Umin ≤U(t) ≤Umax
T (t0) = T0, T(t) ≤Tmax
(2)
where t is the temporal coordinate, Imin, Umin, and smin denote
the lower bounds of I(t), U(t), and soc(t), respectively, Imax,
Umax, and smax represent the corresponding upper bounds,
respectively, t0 is the starting time, T0 denotes the initial
temperature, and Tmax is the upper bound of T(t). The first
two are box constraints on the decision variables, whereas the
remaining two are additional problem-specific constraints. In
our study, the problem-specific constraints are handled using
penalty functions. Specifically, when the battery temperature
exceeds the threshold Tmax, a linear penalty proportional to the
temperature rise is imposed. Similarly, once the terminal volt-
age exceeds the predefined upper limit Umax, a linear penalty
proportional to the magnitude of overvoltage is applied.
In summary, the charging design problem is described as
shown in Fig. 2. It should be noted that the goal of solving
this problem is to identify an optimal or Pareto nondominated
set of charging protocols that best balance multiple objectives
under varying preferences, while satisfying constraints to
ensure battery safety and longevity. Additionally, with a given
charging protocol (i.e., θ), battery states are computed using
an electrochemical-thermal-aging model. This process is time-
consuming. Therefore, developing an efficient algorithm for
charging design holds significant promise.

4
III. ELECTROCHEMICAL-THERMAL-AGING MODEL
A. Electrochemical Model
The electrochemical model describes the internal electro-
chemical dynamics in a lithium-ion battery. For a tradeoff
of efficiency and accuracy, the SPMe model [32] is adopted.
SPMe consists of three sets of PDEs. Two PDEs describe
the variation of lithium-ion concentration within the particles
of the negative and positive electrodes, respectively, while
an additional linear PDE governs the lithium-ion concentra-
tion distribution in the electrolyte across three regions. The
battery voltage can be computed through a simple algebraic
expression, and the state of charge (SOC) can be obtained by
integrating the lithium-ion concentration in the solid phase.
Specifically, the battery voltage can be calculated as follows:
U = Ueq + ηr + ηd + ∆Φ
(3)
where U is the battery voltage, Ueq is the equilibrium po-
tential, ηr represents the ohmic overpotential, ηd denotes the
concentration overpotential, and ∆Φ is the average potential
difference in the electrolyte. More details can be found in [32].
B. Thermal Model
A cylindrical battery is considered in our study. Thus, a
lumped parameter thermal model [33] is used:
ρeff
∂T
∂t = Q −hA
V (T −Ta)
(4)
ρeff =
P
k ρkCp,kLk
P
k Lk
(5)
where ρeff is the effective volumetric heat capacity, T is the
average temperature, t is the time variable, Q is the average
heat generation term, h is the heat transfer coefficient, A is
the heat dissipation surface area, V is the battery volume, and
Ta is the ambient temperature. ρeff is obtained by averaging
the heat capacities of the negative current collector, negative
electrode, separator, positive electrode, and positive current
collector. Here, ρk is the density, Cp,k is the specific heat
capacity, and Lk is the thickness of each component, where
k = {cn, n, s, p, cp} represent the negative current collector,
negative electrode, separator, positive electrode, and positive
current collector, respectively.
C. Aging Model
In this paper, a widely used semi-empirical battery aging
model [34] is adopted, which could account for both the
formation of the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) layer and
lithium plating. In this model, the normalized capacity loss,
Qs [%] is used as a measure of sustainability indicator:
Qs(f, Ah) = σfun(f) × Ahz
(6)
where f denotes the vector of aging factors (SOC, I, T),
each representing the average SOC, current, and temperature,
respectively, z is the power-law exponent representing the
dependence on Ah throughput, and σfun(f) is a nonlinear
function of the severity factors, referred to as the severity
factor function, which can be expanded as follows:
σfun(f) = (α · SOC + β) ·
−Ea + ηa · I
Rgas · (273.15 + T)
(7)
where α and β define SOC dependence, ηa models the I
dependence, Rgas is the universal gas constant, and Ea is
the activation energy. It should be noted that Qs should not
be interpreted as a direct lifetime metric. It is used to quantify
the incremental severity of degradation induced by a given
charging process. In our study, it is employed as a short-
term sustainability and relative aging indicator, rather than an
explicit predictor of end-of-life. Although the aging model
is cumulative, battery degradation can be regarded as the
accumulation of incremental aging contributions over repeated
charging operations. From this perspective, minimizing Qs for
a single charging process corresponds to reducing the per-
charge aging increment. When such charging protocols are
repeatedly applied over the battery’s operational life, a lower
per-cycle degradation increment is expected to translate into
slower long-term degradation trends, even though the exact
end-of-life cannot be directly predicted. As discussed in [34],
such aging proxies are particularly suitable for optimization
and control purposes, as they capture the relative impact
of different charging protocols on battery degradation while
remaining computationally efficient.
In summary, the combination of the aforementioned models
yields an electrochemical-thermal-aging model. The accuracy
of this battery model has been validated through experiments.
Due to the involvement of PDE solving, each simulation
of this model is time-consuming. When utilizing this model
for charging design, it is promising to develop appropriate
optimization techniques to accelerate the design process.
IV. PROPOSED EIMO
A. Motivation
The charging design problem is always formulated as a
CMOP. Bayesian optimization has recently been applied to the
design of charging protocols. While it can accelerate the design
process by leveraging a minimal number of evaluated samples
to construct an informative surrogate model, Bayesian opti-
mization often suffers from being data-hungry when solving
CMOPs. In fact, experience from other similar scenarios can
be used to reduce the reliance on data from the current task.
For charging design, the experience gained from a lithium-ion
battery at different SOH levels can be utilized to optimize the
charging protocols of the battery at the current SOH level.
Note that the “optimization experience” refers to previously
evaluated charging protocols and their corresponding objective
values obtained from charging design tasks at other SOH levels
in our study, rather than heuristic rules or model parameters.
As shown in Fig. 3, the proposed EIMO takes advantage of
Bayesian optimization for charging design and incorporates
transfer learning to merge historical data at the current SOH
level and the experience from higher SOH levels, further
enhancing efficiency. More specifically, the experience is rep-
resented by a subset of high-quality decision vectors (charging

5
Battery states
Bayesian optimization
Optimal charging protocol set
Database
…
Experience
Transfer learning
Enhancing
Fig. 3. Schematic of EIMO.
protocols) collected from source SOH levels. These decision
vectors are modeled as a probability distribution in the decision
space and are incorporated into the optimization process
through a distribution-based transfer acquisition function. It
is worth emphasizing that EIMO does not directly reuse
surrogate models or merge source and target datasets. Instead,
the experience is abstracted as a probabilistic description of
promising regions in the decision space, which serves as
soft guidance to accelerate the search for optimal charging
protocols at the current SOH level.
B. Framework
The framework of EIMO is shown in Fig. 4. First, a
database is constructed by sampling a set of charging protocols
and evaluating the corresponding battery states. Note that
the charging design problem described in (1) and (2) is
decomposed into several single objective subproblems. At each
iteration, a subproblem is randomly selected, and Bayesian
optimization is used to generate a new protocol for that
subproblem. Specifically, Bayesian optimization consists of
two key components: a Gaussian process (GP) model and
an acquisition function. The GP model is constructed to ap-
proximate the time-consuming electrochemical-thermal-aging
model described in Section II, while the acquisition function
is designed to sample a new protocol. Historical data from the
database is used to build the GP model, and a transfer learning
technique is proposed to integrate the historical data with
experience in formulating the acquisition function. By solving
the acquisition function using an evolutionary algorithm, a
new protocol is derived. This protocol is then evaluated using
the electrochemical-thermal-aging model and added to the
database. The process is repeated until the computational
resources are exhausted, after which the optimal charging
protocol set from the database is selected and output.
The main differences between EIMO and another class
of multiobjective optimization algorithms (e.g., multiobjective
genetic algorithms (MOGAs)) lie in solution generation and
selection. In MOGAs, solutions are generated through genetic
operators such as crossover and mutation, and then selected
based on their objective values. In contrast, EIMO integrates
solution generation and selection into a unified process. Specif-
ically, new solutions are obtained by optimizing the acquisition
function. Moreover, historical data is embedded within the
Battery states
Optimal charging 
protocol set
Database
Initial 
sampling
Experience
Transfer learning
Gaussian 
process
Acquisition 
function
Bayesian optimization
Battery 
model
New 
protocol
New protocol
Fig. 4. Framework of EIMO.
acquisition function, allowing EIMO to leverage experience
to accelerate the optimization process.
C. Main Steps
The main steps of EIMO including initialization, problem
decomposition, GP modeling, and transfer acquisition function
are illustrated as follows.
1) Initialization: The initial iteration number t is set to
0. Next, N init charging protocols are sampled randomly and
evaluated. Based on these protocols, a database (denoted as
DM
T = {(θ(l), f(θ(l)))}NT =Ninit+t
l=1
) is constructed, where θ(l)
and f(θ(l)) denote the lth sampled charging protocol and the
corresponding objective values, respectively. Note that data
from other scenarios, such as the charging design for the
battery at different SOH levels, represent the corresponding
experience. These data are consolidated into a dataset denoted
as DM
S
= {ΘS, FS} = {(θ(l)
S , fS(θ(l)
S ))}NS
l=1, where θ(l)
S
and fS(θ(l)
S ) denote the lth charging protocol sampled from
other SOH levels and the corresponding objective values,
respectively.
2) Problem Decomposition: In some studies [35], the mul-
tiple objectives are unified into a single one by a set of
fixed weights. Summing these objectives directly is a specific
example where the weights of these three objectives are equal.
However, user preferences regarding these three objectives
vary across different scenarios. Therefore, providing a set
of Pareto nondominated charging protocols is a promising
approach to accommodate diverse user preferences. To achieve
this, EIMO adopts a decomposition-based strategy. At each
iteration t, a weight vector w(t) is randomly selected from
the predefined set W, where each weight in w(t) represents
the preference for the corresponding objectives. The set W is
generated using the Riesz s-energy-based method [36]. Using
the selected weight vector, the scalarized objective in the
target dataset DT = {ΘT , Ftch
T } = {(θ(l)
T , f tch
T
(θ(l)
T ))}NT
l=1 is
generated based on the augmented Tchebycheff function as
follows:
f tch
T
(θ) =
max
i∈{1,...,m}{w(t)
i fT,i(θ)} + η
m
X
i=1
w(t)
i fT,i(θ)
(8)
where m is the number of objectives, fT,i(·) is the ith normal-
ized objective of the target CMOP, w(t)
i
is the ith component
of w(t), and η is a small positive weight. By solving (8), a

6
Pareto nondominated charging protocol is derived. Note that
the ith objective is normalized as follows:
fT,i(θ) = fi(θ) −f min
i
f max
i
−f min
i
(9)
where fi(θ) is the ith original objective function, f max
i
and
f min
i
are the maximum and the minimum values of this
objective in the dataset. Following a similar way, the scalarized
source dataset DS is also produced based on DM
S
and the
augmented Tchebycheff function.
3) GP Modeling: For the selected subproblem, a GP model,
denoted as N( ˆf(θ), s2(θ)), is constructed to approximate the
Tchebycheff scalarized objective based on the dataset DT ,
thereby accelerating the design process:
ˆf (θ) = ˆµ + 1TC−1  Ftch
T
−1ˆµ

(10)
s2 (θ) = ˆσ2

1 −cTC−1 c + 1 −1TC−1c
1TC−11

(11)
ˆµ = 1T C−1Ftch
T
1TC−11
(12)
ˆσ2 =
 Ftch
T
−1ˆµ
T C−1  Ftch
T
−1ˆµ

N
(13)
where ˆf (θ) denotes the predictor, s2 (θ) denotes the uncer-
tainty of the predictor, 1 is an N-dimensional (i.e., N = 2M)
vector of ones, C is an (N × N) matrix with the entry
Cij = k

θ(i)
T , θ(j)
T

, and c is an N-dimensional vector with
the entry ci = k

θ, θ(i)
T

. Here, k (·, ·) denotes the correlation
of two vectors and is quantified by a Gaussian kernel function:
k

θ(i)
T , θ(j)
T

= exp
 
−
N
X
k=1
pk
θ(i)
T,k −θ(j)
T,k

2
!
(14)
where pk is a weight parameter, and θ(i)
T,k and θ(j)
T,k are the kth
dimensions of θ(i)
T
and θ(j)
T , respectively.
4) Transfer Acquisition Function: In traditional Bayesian
optimization, an acquisition function is designed using the
GP model to sample a new decision vector that effectively
balances exploitation and exploration. To effectively integrate
data with experience, EIMO introduces a transfer acquisition
function (denoted as a(θ)), which incorporates DS, represent-
ing the experience:
a(θ) = ˆf(θ) −β · s(θ)
|
{z
}
LCB
−γt
|{z}
Weight
· log pS(θ)
|
{z
}
Experience
.
(15)
As shown in (15), a(θ) consists of three critical components:
the lower confidence bound (LCB), a term representing the
experience, and a weight term.
LCB is a commonly used sampling criterion in Bayesian
optimization, known for its ability to effectively balance ex-
ploitation and exploration. Specifically, ˆf(θ) is the GP model’s
predictor, and minimizing it promotes exploitation in regions
with promising objective values. Conversely, s(θ) quantifies
the uncertainty of the predictor, and minimizing (−s(θ)) pro-
motes exploration of regions in the decision space that exhibit
Algorithm 1 EIMO
1: t ←0;
2: Sample
Ninit
charging
protocols
(denoted
as
θ(1)
T , . . . , θ(Ninit)
T
)
and
evaluate
these
protocols
by
the electrochemical-thermal-aging model;
3: DM
T ←{(θ(l)
T , f(θ(l)
T ))}NT =Ninit+t
l=1
;
4: while t < tmax do
5:
Randomly select a weight vector (denoted as w(t));
6:
Scalarize DM
S
and DM
T
based on the augmented
Tchebycheff
scalarized
function
to
generate
two
datasets: DS and DT ;
7:
Build a GP model (i.e., N( ˆf(θ), s2(θ))) based on DT ;
8:
Select the Np best decision vectors from DS and DT
based on the scalarized function values, thus forming
two populations: PS and PT ;
9:
Estimate
the
population
distribution
of
PS
and
PT , thereby obtaining two Gaussian distributions:
N(µS, ΣS) and N(µT , ΣT );
10:
Calculate γt according to (16);
11:
Generate a new protocol (denoted as θ(t)
T ) by optimizing
the transfer acquisition function (15) using an evolution-
ary algorithm;
12:
Evaluate θ(t)
T
by the electrochemical-thermal-aging
model;
13:
DM
T ←DM
T ∪{(θ(t)
T , f(θ(t)
T ))} ;
14:
t ←t + 1;
15: end while
16: Output the nondominated decision vectors (i.e., optimal
charging protocols) in DM
T ;
greater uncertainty. In summary, by appropriately setting β
and minimizing the LCB, a trade-off between exploitation and
exploration can be effectively achieved. This facilitates the
identification of multiple promising regions, thereby enabling
the efficient discovery of high-quality solutions.
pS(θ) = N(µS, ΣS) is a Gaussian distribution derived
from DS, which encapsulates experience from data collected at
different SOH levels that have been optimized. First, the best
Np decision vectors are selected from DS. Next, µS and ΣS
are calculated by using the maximum likelihood estimation
method [37]. Through the use of log pS(θ), experience from
other SOH levels can be effectively utilized. Specifically, if
the SOH levels used to construct pS(θ) are similar to that
of the current task, the optimal decision vector is likely to
conform to this distribution. Intuitively, a higher value of
log pS(θ) indicates a greater likelihood that the decision vector
θ aligns with pS(θ). Consequently, minimizing (−log pS(θ))
promotes alignment with this distribution, thereby enabling
knowledge transfer from previously optimized SOH levels.
In this manner, experience from other SOH levels can be
leveraged to accelerate the charging design process.
The weight γt controls the impact of the experience on the
optimization process. The rationale for tuning γt is twofold:
• First, it ensures that the experience has a greater influence
when DS closely resembles DT ;
• Additionally, as optimization progresses and more new

7
data become available, the influence of experience should
diminish, reducing the risk of negative transfer.
Based on the above observations, γt is adjusted adaptively as
follows:
γt =
tmax −t
tmax

·
τ
KL(pS(θ)||pT (θ))
(16)
where KL(pS(θ)||pT (θ)) is the Kullback-Leibler (KL) di-
vergence to quantify the similarity between DS and DT ,
pT (θ) is derived from DT in the same manner as pS(θ) is
derived from DS, tmax is the maximum iteration number, and
τ is a preset constant. As shown in (16), γt is influenced
by both the KL divergence and the iteration number t. The
inclusion of the KL divergence term is intended to encourage
EIMO to transfer more experience when DS and DT exhibit
substantial similarity. Note that the smaller the KL divergence,
the higher the similarity between DS and DT . Additionally,
the incorporation of t is designed to guide EIMO towards
predominantly relying on the experience during the initial
stages of optimization, gradually reducing its impact as the
optimization progresses. This adjustment strategy is consistent
with the aforementioned analysis.
Finally, the transfer acquisition function is solved using an
evolutionary algorithm, resulting in a new protocol (denoted as
θ(t)
T ). Afterward, θ(t)
T
is evaluated using the electrochemical-
thermal-aging model and then appended to DM
T . The above
procedures are repeated until the computational resources are
exhausted (i.e., t ≥tmax). In summary, the whole process of
EIMO is outlined in Algorithm 1.
Remark 1: In Eq. (16), both pS and pT are estimated
from finite samples, which may introduce estimation uncer-
tainty in the KL divergence. In our framework, however, the
KL divergence is not used as a precise statistical estimator,
but rather as a relative discrepancy measure to guide the
Bayesian optimization process. Specifically, the KL divergence
is evaluated consistently across candidate charging protocols
using the same estimation procedure and sample size. As
a result, although absolute KL values may be affected by
finite-sample noise, the relative ordering and trend information
that are relevant for acquisition optimization remain robust.
Moreover, the Bayesian optimization framework naturally
tolerates moderate noise in objective evaluations through its
probabilistic surrogate modeling. Therefore, the finite-sample
estimation of pS and pT does not compromise the effectiveness
of EIMO, while providing a practical and informative metric
for distributional deviation.
Remark 2: To the best of our knowledge, transfer opti-
mization has rarely been explored in the context of battery
charging optimization. In contrast, transfer learning has been
widely used in battery management systems, particularly for
tasks such as SOC and SOH estimation [38]. In most studies,
transfer learning is implemented at the surrogate model level
through weight transfer between models. Recently, transfer
learning has been combined with a Wasserstein generative
adversarial network to optimize the topology of battery cooling
channels [39], where the generator parameters obtained during
pre-training are transferred for subsequent fine-tuning. How-
ever, the problem considered in this work is fundamentally
TABLE I
PARAMETERS OF THE ELECTROCHEMICAL-THERMAL-AGING MODEL
Battery Parameter
Value
Nominal capacity
5 Ah
Upper cutoff voltage
4.20 V
Lower cutoff voltage
2.50 V
Length
70 mm
Diameter
21 mm
Ambient temperature
298.15 K
TABLE II
PARAMETER SETTINGS OF EIMO
EIMO Parameter
Value
η
0.05
Ninit
20
NS
1000
Np
20
τ
5
β
0.5
tmax
200
different, as it focuses on improving the acquisition function,
which plays a more critical role in guiding the search process
in optimization tasks. Additionally, compared with warm-
start Bayesian optimization, EIMO does not directly utilize
all available experience. Instead, according to Eq. (15), it
selectively exploits useful experience while reducing the risk
of negative transfer.
Remark 3: In EIMO, the experience distribution is modeled
as a Gaussian model fitted to the top Np solutions. The reasons
are as follows. From a Bayesian optimization perspective,
the objective of modeling optimization experience is not to
construct an accurate global surrogate or density estimator,
but rather to progressively localize and bias the search toward
promising regions of the decision space. In this context, the
Gaussian model serves as a compact and tractable repre-
sentation of elite solutions for guiding experience transfer,
rather than a precise characterization of the underlying solution
distribution. Although the global distribution of high-quality
charging protocols may be multimodal or highly nonlinear, the
experience distribution is fitted only to the top Np solutions,
which typically concentrate in a relatively localized region.
Capturing the dominant mean and covariance of this region is
sufficient for the purpose of accelerating convergence, even if
finer multimodal structures are not explicitly represented. We
agree that more expressive models, such as Gaussian mixture
models or nonparametric density estimators, could provide
a richer representation of multimodal experience. However,
these approaches would substantially increase modeling and
computational complexity, while offering limited additional
benefit for the primary goal of region localization in Bayesian
optimization. Importantly, the proposed EIMO framework is
not inherently tied to a Gaussian assumption, and alternative
experience representations could be incorporated in a plug-in
manner as future extensions.

8
Fig. 5. Optimal charging protocol sets at different SOH levels.
TABLE III
REPRESENTATIVE OPTIMAL CHARGING PROTOCOLS AND SIMULATION
RESULTS
Protocol Parameters
tc/s
Tp/K
Qs/%
A
1.20/1.00/0.60/0.40/0.30/0.10
2880
6.88
1.46
B
0.40/0.40/0.40/0.13/0.26/0.41
7200
1.39
0.66
C
0.40/1.00/0.59/0.40/0.30/0.10
5284
4.56
0.57
D
1.20/1.00/0.60/0.40/0.30/0.10
2016
6.54
0.75
E
0.66/0.42/0.40/0.10/0.26/0.44
4686
1.72
0.39
F
0.40/0.89/0.59/0.39/0.30/0.11
3781
3.77
0.31
* The protocol parameters: cc1/cc2/cc3/∆s1/∆s2/∆s3
V. VALIDATION AND DISCUSSION
A. Simulation Setup
To verify the effectiveness of EIMO, it was used to optimize
the charging protocols for a lithium-ion battery at different
SOH levels. As is widely adopted in many fast charging
design studies, including Bayesian optimization methods [4],
[26], reinforcement learning approaches [8], machine learning-
based methods [23], and control-oriented strategies [40], [41],
a battery model is first calibrated using experimental data, and
optimal charging protocols are subsequently derived through
simulation. Following this established paradigm, we developed
an electrochemical-thermal-aging model in PyBaMM, with
model parameters identified from experimental data obtained
from a real lithium-ion battery. All charging protocol opti-
mization and performance comparisons were then carried out
through simulations based on this experimentally validated
model. The key parameters of the electrochemical-thermal-
aging model are presented in Table I, while the parameter
settings for EIMO are detailed in Table II. The upper bounds
of cc1, cc2, and cc3 are 1.2, 1.0, and 0.8, respectively, while
their lower bounds are all set to 0.4. The battery is charged
from 0 to a SOC of 0.8. The upper bounds of ∆s1 and
∆s2 are 0.4 and 0.3, respectively, and their lower bounds
are both 0.1. The charge quantity of the third stage is given
by (0.8 −∆s1 −∆s2). Moreover, an effective evolutionary
algorithm, namely differential evolution [42], was employed to
minimize the transfer acquisition function in (15). Specifically,
the differential evolution optimizer was configured with a pop-
ulation size of 30 and a maximum of 20 generations, resulting
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 6. Charging processes of fast charging protocols.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 7. Charging processes of smooth charging protocols.
in 600 evaluations of the acquisition function. It is worth
noting that each acquisition function evaluation involves only
surrogate model predictions and probability density computa-
tions, which are computationally inexpensive. Therefore, the
computational overhead associated with solving the acquisition
function using differential evolution is negligible compared
with the cost of high-fidelity battery simulations. Moreover,
alternative optimization algorithms can be readily employed
to solve the transfer acquisition function, potentially further
improving computational efficiency.
B. Optimal Charging Protocol Set
As stated in Section II, the charging design problem that
considers various user demands is typically formulated as
a CMOP. Moreover, user preferences for each objective are
often difficult to quantify precisely. Thus, providing a set of
Pareto nondominated charging protocols is a promising way
to accommodate diverse user preferences. Similar to [24], for
performance assessment, the optimal charging protocol sets
at different SOH levels were individually obtained by EIMO
using adequate computational resources (i.e., 1,000 simulation

9
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 8. Number of optimal charging protocols varies with the number of simulation evaluations in a typical run. (a) Using experience from SOH=1.0. (b)
Using experience from SOH=0.9. (c) Using experience from SOH=0.8.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 9. HV value varies with the number of simulation evaluations in a typical run. (a) Using experience from SOH=1.0. (b) Using experience from SOH=0.9.
(c) Using experience from SOH=0.8.
TABLE IV
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON BETWEEN EIMO AND THE OTHER THREE COMPETITORS IN TERMS OF COMPUTATIONAL EFFICIENCY AND HV
Case
SOH=1.0→SOH=0.7
SOH=0.9→SOH=0.7
SOH=0.8→SOH=0.7
ParEGO
DISK
PIMD
EIMO
ParEGO
DISK
PIMD
EIMO
ParEGO
DISK
PIMD
EIMO
Computational time (s)
380.3
(±32.9)
304.4
(±17.7)
298.0
(±18.5)
208.6
(±7.7)
360.2
(±10.8)
295.5
(±16.9)
300.7
(±13.1)
209.6
(±7.6)
369.8
(±16.9)
314.4
(±10.1)
327.4
(±11.1)
224.7
(±13.6)
Simulation evaluations
133.8
(±6.9)
146.2
(±7.3)
139.6
(±9.3)
119.8
(±3.3)
132.6
(±3.6)
142.0
(±7.3)
135.6
(±5.7)
119.4
(±3.8)
134.6
(±6.8)
150.2
(±4.8)
144.4
(±5.6)
125.4
(±7.3)
HV value
0.7409
(±2.5E-3)
0.7273
(±1.9E-2)
0.6957
(±1.2E-2)
0.7426
(±4E-4)
0.7413
(±1.4E-3)
0.7359
(±4.2E-3)
0.6880
(±2.4E-2)
0.7436
(±8E-4)
0.7407
(±2E-3)
0.7362
(±5.6E-3)
0.6976
(±1.2E-2)
0.7468
(±6E-4)
evaluations). As shown in Fig. 5, the optimal charging protocol
sets vary across different SOH levels. In other words, for an
operating battery, the optimal charging protocols should be
updated to account for aging degradation. Additionally, the
sets of two successive SOH levels are closely related to each
other. Specifically, there are 763, 784, 792, and 782 optimal
charging protocols corresponding to the SOH levels of 0.7, 0.8,
0.9, and 1.0, respectively. To better observe the similarities and
differences between the optimal charging protocols at different
SOH levels, three protocols were sampled from the optimal
charging protocol sets corresponding to the SOH levels of 0.7
and 1.0, respectively. Of these protocols, two are designed for
fast charging, and the other four for smooth charging. The
details of these six protocols can be found in Table III. As
shown in Table III, three-stage constant current protocols were
considered in this study. Note that the proposed EIMO serves
as a general optimization framework, capable of optimizing
other types of charging protocols as well.
The charging processes of the fast charging protocols are
shown in Fig. 6. Protocols A and D prioritize minimizing
charging time, requiring high current input throughout the
entire charging process. Since the input current constraint
is relatively tight while the voltage constraint is relatively
loose, the fast-charging strategies remain largely consistent
across different SOH levels, with each stage operated nearly
at the maximum allowable charging current. Fig. 7 presents
the charging processes of the smooth charging protocols.
Protocols B and E aim to reduce the temperature rise of
the battery, requiring the lowest possible current during all
stages to keep heat generation minimal. Protocols C and F
focus on reducing lithium-ion capacity loss. They use high
current during the mid-range SOC, usually in the second or
third stages. It is consistent with the degradation mechanism
in the battery model. It can be observed that the charging

10
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 10. HV comparison based on 100 optimal solutions obtained by EIMO,
ParEGO, DISK, and PIMD over multiple independent runs. Markers denote
mean values, and error bars represent the corresponding variability (e.g.,
standard deviation) (a) Using experience from SOH=1.0. (b) Using experience
from SOH=0.9. (c) Using experience from SOH=0.8.
protocols across different SOH levels exhibit differences under
the two conditions. In addition to the optimal charging pro-
tocols addressing these three objectives, the optimal charging
protocol set encompasses a variety of balanced protocols that
accommodate diverse user demands. In summary, the optimal
charging protocols show both consistency and variation across
different SOH levels, making this problem well-suited to be
addressed within a transfer optimization framework.
C. Performance Comparison
The performance of EIMO was compared with three repre-
sentative methods. Among them, ParEGO [43] is a widely used
decomposition-based Bayesian optimization algorithm, while
DISK [44] and PIMD [45] are two recently proposed state-
of-the-art methods for expensive multiobjective optimization.
Specifically, these four methods were used to optimize the
charging protocols of a lithium-ion battery with an SOH level
of 0.7, leveraging the experience from higher SOH levels:
SOH = 1.0, SOH = 0.9, and SOH = 0.8. As shown in
Fig. 8, the number of optimal charging protocols obtained by
EIMO consistently exceeded that obtained by the other three
competitors across all evaluations. Additionally, the advantage
becomes more significant as the number of evaluations in-
creases. Moreover, experience from a closer SOH level proves
to be more beneficial. The reason is intuitive: the battery’s
internal states are more similar between two closer SOH
levels. The simulation results demonstrate that, by leveraging
transferred experience, EIMO effectively reduces ineffective
exploration, enabling rapid convergence to the Pareto front
and producing a dense set of optimal charging protocols.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 11. HV value of all solutions obtained by EIMO with different similarity
metrics. (a) Using experience from SOH=1.0. (b) Using experience from
SOH=0.9. (c) Using experience from SOH=0.8.
For a quantitative comparison, the Hypervolume (HV) val-
ues achieved by ParEGO and EIMO according to the number
of simulation evaluations are shown in Fig. 9. Note that
hypervolume (HV) is a widely used performance metric in
multiobjective optimization, particularly when the true Pareto
front is unknown, as it simultaneously evaluates both con-
vergence and diversity. A higher HV value indicates that the
obtained optimal charging protocol set is more uniform and
closer to the true optimal set. As shown in Fig. 9, without
utilizing the experience from other SOH levels, the HV values
achieved by the other three competitors are consistently lower
than those achieved by EIMO.
Furthermore, we compared the computational time and
simulation evaluations required by these methods to obtain
100 optimal charging protocols in Table IV. The HV value was
also calculated for further analysis. Compared with ParEGO,
EIMO reduces computational time by 45.15%, 41.81%, and
39.24% in the three cases, respectively. That is to say, although
constructing the GP model incurs a certain computational
overhead, EIMO significantly reduces the number of sim-
ulation evaluations by leveraging experience. Consequently,
the overall computational time is reduced. The error bars in
Fig. 10 suggest that EIMO demonstrates superior stability
compared to the competitors, consistently achieving higher
HV values with lower standard deviation. The p-values of
the Wilcoxon signed-rank test for EIMO compared with the
other competitors in the three cases are {0.064453, 0.001953,
0.001953}, {0.003906, 0.001953, 0.001953}, and {0.001953,
0.001953, 0.001953}, respectively, further supporting the sta-
tistical significance of the observed performance differences.
In summary, by leveraging the experience from other SOH
levels, EIMO can significantly improve efficiency. It is inter-
esting to find that with the same number of optimal charging
protocols, the set obtained by EIMO owns higher HV values
than that achieved by ParEGO. It implies that the quality of
the charging protocols obtained by EIMO is higher than that
achieved by ParEGO. It is worth noting that, in our study, a set

11
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 12.
HV value of all solutions obtained by EIMO and the competitors
in which the competitors were initialized using the final population obtained
at the previous SOH level. (a) Using experience from SOH=1.0. (b) Using
experience from SOH=0.9. (c) Using experience from SOH=0.8.
of Pareto nondominated charging protocols is obtained rather
than a single solution. As a result, the approach requires more
simulation evaluations compared to methods that generate only
one charging protocol. Nevertheless, it remains more efficient
than recently proposed Bayesian optimization methods [25],
[26], which typically require around 20 simulation evaluations
per charging protocol.
D. Further Discussions
Effectiveness of the Similarity Metric: To test the robustness
of the similarity metric, we implemented a variant of EIMO,
termed EIMO-Wd, in which the KL divergence is replaced
with the Wasserstein distance. The comparison results between
EIMO-Wd and the KL-based variant (denoted as EIMO-KL)
are presented in Fig. 11. The final HV values of EIMO-Wd
in the three cases are {0.7472, 0.7486, 0.7497}, while those
of EIMO-KL are {0.7456, 0.7476, 0.7494}. These results
indicate that the two methods achieve highly comparable
performance. As discussed in Remark 1, the similarity metric
is not intended to serve as a precise statistical estimator of
distributional difference, but rather as a relative discrepancy
measure to bias the Bayesian optimization process toward
promising regions. Therefore, alternative similarity metrics
can also be adopted without significantly affecting the overall
optimization performance.
Effectiveness of the Transfer Learning of EIMO: To evaluate
the transfer learning capability of EIMO, we conducted an
additional comparison in which the competing methods were
initialized using the final population obtained at the previous
SOH level, serving as a form of transfer learning. The results
in Fig. 12 show that EIMO consistently outperforms the
competing methods across all evaluation budgets. Additionally,
the final HV values obtained by EIMO are higher than those of
the competing methods. The results indicate that the transfer
mechanism in EIMO is particularly effective for cross-SOH
fast charging design. Therefore, the observed performance
(a)
(b)
Fig. 13. HV value of all solutions obtained by EIMO and ParEGO for different
batteries. (a) Ecker2015 battery. (b) O’Regan2022 battery.
improvements cannot be solely attributed to the availability of
transferred experience. Indeed, the core contribution of EIMO
lies in being among the first attempts to leverage optimization
experience from different SOH levels for fast charging design.
The practical motivation of this work is to address realistic
battery aging scenarios, in which historical charging optimiza-
tion data at higher SOH levels are naturally available and can
be exploited to improve efficiency at lower SOH levels. This
design choice does not contradict the effectiveness of EIMO,
but rather reflects the practical setting in which transferable
experience can be naturally utilized.
Performance of EIMO Across Different Batteries: To test the
capability of EIMO across different batteries, we conducted
two additional experiments in which the optimization expe-
rience obtained from the studied battery is transferred to the
O’Regan2022 [46] and Ecker2015 [47] batteries, respectively.
Specifically, the O’Regan2022 battery is an 18650 cell with a
capacity of approximately 5 Ah, which is similar to the battery
used in the original study. In contrast, the Ecker2015 battery
is a small-capacity cell with a nominal capacity of 0.156 Ah.
The HV convergence curves in Fig. 13 show that EIMO can
accelerate the optimization process when the battery types are
similar. When the battery characteristics differ substantially,
the performance of EIMO remains comparable to that of
conventional optimization. This observation is consistent with
the fundamental principle of transfer optimization, where
knowledge transfer is most beneficial when the source and
target tasks share a higher degree of similarity.
Influence of the Number of Charging Stages: In principle,
increasing the number of charging stages allows the charging
protocols to be more flexible, which may lead to improved
optimization results. However, a larger number of stages also
increases the dimensionality of the optimization problem and
therefore makes the optimization process more challenging. To
identify a more appropriate choice of M, we evaluated the per-
formance of EIMO under a larger number of charging stages
by setting M = 5. In this case, the optimization problem
involves ten decision variables, including five SOC switching
thresholds and five charging currents. The SOC thresholds
define the transitions between charging stages, while the
charging currents determine the current applied at each stage.
The corresponding variable bounds were defined to ensure
physically meaningful charging protocols and to maintain the
overall SOC constraint. Based on the above configuration, we
conducted additional optimization simulations and compared

12
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 14.
HV value of all solutions obtained by EIMO and ParEGO for
charging design with M = 5. (a) Using experience from SOH=1.0. (b) Using
experience from SOH=0.9. (c) Using experience from SOH=0.8.
the convergence behaviors of ParEGO and EIMO. The results
are shown in Fig. 14. The results indicate that EIMO still
outperforms ParEGO when the number of charging stages in-
creases. However, the performance improvement becomes less
pronounced as the dimensionality of the problem increases.
Considering the above observations and the recommendations
in previous studies [4], [6], setting M
= 3 provides a
good balance between optimization flexibility and computa-
tional complexity in practice. Importantly, the proposed EIMO
framework itself does not rely on a fixed number of charging
stages. The main contribution of this work is the experience-
driven acquisition strategy that enables efficient transfer of
optimization knowledge across different SOH levels. From a
methodological perspective, EIMO can be naturally extended
to a variable number of stages by redefining the decision
vector accordingly. Similarly, continuous charging profiles can
be approximated using piecewise-constant or piecewise-linear
parameterizations, where the corresponding parameters can be
optimized within the same Bayesian optimization framework.
Effectiveness of the Objective Normalization: The normal-
ization of objectives in our framework is not an ad-hoc oper-
ation, but an integral part of the Tchebycheff decomposition-
based multiobjective formulation, which requires objectives
with different physical scales to be mapped onto a comparable
range. We compared the performance of EIMO using min-max
normalization with two variants: one using Z-score normaliza-
tion and the other without normalization. The results in Fig.
15 show that min-max normalization performs better than the
other two methods. The reasons are as follows. Min-max nor-
malization is employed to balance heterogeneous objectives so
that no single objective dominates the scalarized optimization
due to scale differences. Although the min-max values may
be less stable in early iterations when the dataset is small,
Bayesian optimization primarily relies on relative comparisons
among candidate solutions, and all objectives are normalized
consistently at each iteration. As a result, moderate early-
stage variations in normalization have a limited impact on the
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 15. HV value of all solutions obtained by EIMO variants with different
normalization strategies. (a) Using experience from SOH=1.0. (b) Using
experience from SOH=0.9. (c) Using experience from SOH=0.8.
Fig. 16. HV value of all solutions obtained by EIMO for different values of
τ.
optimization trajectory. Moreover, the proposed experience-
enhanced framework leverages historical optimization data
from higher SOH levels, which provides a more stable initial
normalization reference and further mitigates the effect of
early-stage statistical uncertainty. As optimization proceeds
and more samples are collected, the min–max estimates rapidly
stabilize. Z-score normalization reflects the deviation of ob-
jective values from the current population mean rather than
the relative distance to an ideal reference level. When com-
bined with the Tchebycheff decomposition, this property may
weaken the dominance of the maximum weighted deviation
term to some extent, thereby affecting the consistency of
solution ranking and the subsequent optimization efficiency.
Without normalization, the numerical ranges and variation
scales of different objectives are typically inconsistent. As
a result, the dominant term in the Tchebycheff aggregation
is more likely to be influenced by objectives with larger
numerical scales, causing the scalarization result to be biased
toward those objectives. Consequently, the relative tradeoff
among multiple objectives may not be adequately reflected.
Sensitivity of the Parameter τ: The parameter τ in Eq. (16)

13
controls the transfer process. A larger value of τ leads to
stronger transfer, and vice versa. A value that is too small
cannot fully utilize the experience, while a value that is too
large may lead to negative transfer. We evaluated the sensitivity
of τ by varying its value. The results in Fig. 16 support this
observation, showing that τ = 5 achieves the best performance
among the tested values. Therefore, τ = 5 was used in our
simulations.
Effectiveness of Differential Evolution for Acquisition Func-
tion Optimization: As discussed previously, setting the number
of charging stages to M = 3 leads to a well-performing
optimization problem with a six-dimensional decision space,
which is well-suited for differential evolution [42]. For the
fast charging design problem, the primary computational cost
arises from battery model simulations, while the cost of
optimizing the acquisition function is relatively small (less
than 8% of the total cost). It is worth noting that the proposed
EIMO framework is flexible, and other optimization methods
can also be employed for acquisition function optimization.
To further validate the choice of differential evolution, we
compared it with a classical optimization method, namely
multi-start sequential quadratic programming (MS-SQP). For
the case of using experience from SOH = 0.8, the experimental
results show that differential evolution achieves an HV value
of 0.746143 with 120 evaluations (245.32 s), while MS-SQP
obtains 0.745280 with 128 evaluations (259.84 s). This indi-
cates that differential evolution achieves better performance
with fewer evaluations, demonstrating advantages in both op-
timization efficiency and solution quality. Overall, differential
evolution is a suitable choice for this problem.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, an experience-informed multiobjective opti-
mizer called EIMO was proposed for the charging design
of lithium-ion batteries. In EIMO, Bayesian optimization is
adopted to leverage the complete information from histori-
cal data, accelerating the charging design process. By em-
bedding the Riesz s-energy-based method into the Bayesian
optimization framework, EIMO can effectively handle a set
of charging objectives. Furthermore, it utilizes experience
from other SOH levels through a specially designed transfer
acquisition function, where the experience data are represented
using a probability distribution. Extensive experiments and
simulations have demonstrated that EIMO can generate a set
of optimal charging protocols that meet diverse user demands.
Additionally, it is more accurate and faster than methods that
do not utilize experience, such as ParEGO and two state-of-
the-art methods.
REFERENCES
[1] F. Wu, J. Maier, and Y. Yu, “Guidelines and trends for next-generation
rechargeable lithium and lithium-ion batteries,” Chemical Society Re-
views, vol. 49, no. 5, pp. 1569–1614, 2020.
[2] T. Kim, W. Song, D.-Y. Son, L. K. Ono, and Y. Qi, “Lithium-ion
batteries: outlook on present, future, and hybridized technologies,”
Journal of Materials Chemistry A, vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 2942–2964, 2019.
[3] Y. Cao, E. Tian, H. Chen, and H. Chen, “Multi-fault diagnosis for series-
connected lithium-ion battery packs based on improved sensor topology
and correlation coefficient method,” IEEE Transactions on Automation
Science and Engineering, 2024.
[4] B. Jiang, M. D. Berliner, K. Lai, P. A. Asinger, H. Zhao, P. K. Herring,
M. Z. Bazant, and R. D. Braatz, “Fast charging design for lithium-ion
batteries via bayesian optimization,” Applied Energy, vol. 307, Article:
118244, 2022.
[5] A. Yadu, S. S. Brahmadathan, S. Agarwal, S. DB, S. Lee, and Y. Kim,
“On-device personalized charging strategy with an aging model for
lithium-ion batteries using deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Automation Science and Engineering, 2023.
[6] B.-C. Wang, Y.-Y. Mao, Y. Wang, and H.-X. Li, “Gaussian process-
accelerated multiobjective evolutionary design of charging process con-
sidering multiple user preferences,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Informatics, in press, 2024.
[7] P. M. Attia, A. Grover, N. Jin, K. A. Severson, T. M. Markov, Y.-H.
Liao, M. H. Chen, B. Cheong, N. Perkins, Z. Yang et al., “Closed-
loop optimization of fast-charging protocols for batteries with machine
learning,” Nature, vol. 578, no. 7795, pp. 397–402, 2020.
[8] X. Dong, H. Xv, T. Pan, X. Liu, J. Tian, and P. Wang, “Multi-objective
charging optimization of lithium-ion batteries considering electrical,
thermal, and aging behaviors using deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE
Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering, 2025.
[9] C. D. Korkas, S. Baldi, S. Yuan, and E. B. Kosmatopoulos, “An adaptive
learning-based approach for nearly optimal dynamic charging of electric
vehicle fleets,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems,
vol. 19, no. 7, pp. 2066–2075, 2017.
[10] M. Rouholamini, C. Wang, H. Nehrir, X. Hu, Z. Hu, H. Aki, B. Zhao,
Z. Miao, and K. Strunz, “A review of modeling, management, and
applications of grid-connected li-ion battery storage systems,” IEEE
Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 4505–4524, 2022.
[11] K. Liu, C. Zou, K. Li, and T. Wik, “Charging pattern optimization
for lithium-ion batteries with an electrothermal-aging model,” IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 14, no. 12, pp. 5463–5474,
2018.
[12] X. Hu, Y. Zheng, X. Lin, and Y. Xie, “Optimal multistage charging
of NCA/graphite lithium-ion batteries based on electrothermal-aging
dynamics,” IEEE Transactions on Transportation Electrification, vol. 6,
no. 2, pp. 427–438, 2020.
[13] X. Lin, X. Hao, Z. Liu, and W. Jia, “Health conscious fast charging
of li-ion batteries via a single particle model with aging mechanisms,”
Journal of Power Sources, vol. 400, pp. 305–316, 2018.
[14] X. Lin, S. Wang, and Y. Kim, “A framework for charging strategy
optimization using a physics-based battery model,” Journal of Applied
Electrochemistry, vol. 49, pp. 779–793, 2019.
[15] C. Zou, X. Hu, Z. Wei, T. Wik, and B. Egardt, “Electrochemical esti-
mation and control for lithium-ion battery health-aware fast charging,”
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 65, no. 8, pp. 6635–
6645, 2017.
[16] G. Hwang, N. Sitapure, J. Moon, H. Lee, S. Hwang, and J. S.-I.
Kwon, “Model predictive control of lithium-ion batteries: Develop-
ment of optimal charging profile for reduced intracycle capacity fade
using an enhanced single particle model (spm) with first-principled
chemical/mechanical degradation mechanisms,” Chemical Engineering
Journal, vol. 435, p. 134768, 2022.
[17] M. L. Betalo, I. Ullah, F. B. Tesema, Z. Wu, J. Li, and X. Bai,
“Generative AI-Driven Multi-Agent DRL for task allocation in UAV-
Assisted EMPD within 6G-Enabled SAGIN networks,” IEEE Internet
of Things Journal, 2025.
[18] M. L. Betalo, S. Leng, A. M. Seid, H. N. Abishu, A. Erbad, and X. Bai,
“Dynamic charging and path planning for UAV-powered rechargeable
WSNs using multi-agent deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Automation Science and Engineering, 2025.
[19] M. L. Betalo, S. Leng, H. N. Abishu, A. M. Seid, M. Fakirah,
A. Erbad, and M. Guizani, “Multi-agent DRL-based energy harvesting
for freshness of data in UAV-assisted wireless sensor networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Network and Service Management, vol. 21, no. 6, pp.
6527–6541, 2024.
[20] M. L. Betalo, S. Leng, H. N. Abishu, F. A. Dharejo, A. M. Seid,
A. Erbad, R. A. Naqvi, L. Zhou, and M. Guizani, “Multi-agent deep re-
inforcement learning-based task scheduling and resource sharing for O-
RAN-empowered multi-UAV-assisted wireless sensor networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 73, no. 7, pp. 9247–9261,
2023.
[21] H. Cao, Y.-Y. Mao, B.-C. Wang, and B. Luo, “Meta-reinforcement
learning for fast charging design of diverse lithium-ion batteries,”
Journal of Energy Storage, vol. 154, Article 2026.
[22] Z. Xiong, B. Luo, B.-C. Wang, X. Xu, and T. Huang, “Multiobjective
battery charging strategy based on deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE

14
Transactions on Transportation Electrification, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 6893–
6903, 2023.
[23] Z. Wei, X. Yang, Y. Li, H. He, W. Li, and D. U. Sauer, “Ma-
chine learning-based fast charging of lithium-ion battery by perceiving
and regulating internal microscopic states,” Energy Storage Materials,
vol. 56, pp. 62–75, 2023.
[24] X. Wang and B. Jiang, “Multi-objective optimization for fast charging
design of lithium-ion batteries using constrained bayesian optimization,”
Journal of Power Sources, vol. 584, p. 233602, 2023.
[25] G. Dong, Y. Feng, Y. Lou, M. Zhang, and J. Wei, “Data-driven
fast charging optimization for lithium-ion battery using bayesian op-
timization with fast convergence,” IEEE Transactions on Transportation
Electrification, 2023.
[26] B. Jiang, Y. Wang, Z. Ma, and Q. Lu, “Fast charging of lithium-
ion batteries using deep bayesian optimization with recurrent neural
network,” IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering,
2025.
[27] B.-C. Wang, H.-X. Li, and H.-D. Yang, “Spatial correlation-based
incremental learning for spatiotemporal modeling of battery thermal
process,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 67, no. 4,
pp. 2885–2893, 2019.
[28] F. Ju, J. Wang, J. Li, G. Xiao, and S. Biller, “Virtual battery: A
battery simulation framework for electric vehicles,” IEEE Transactions
on Automation Science and Engineering, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 5–15, 2012.
[29] M. U. Tahir, A. Sangwongwanich, D.-I. Stroe, and F. Blaabjerg,
“Overview of multi-stage charging strategies for li-ion batteries,” Journal
of Energy Chemistry, 2023.
[30] X. Wu, Y. Xia, J. Du, X. Gao, and S. Nikolay, “Multistage constant
current charging strategy based on multiobjective current optimization,”
IEEE Transactions on Transportation Electrification, vol. 9, no. 4, pp.
4990–5001, 2022.
[31] Z. Wei, Z. Quan, J. Wu, Y. Li, J. Pou, and H. Zhong, “Deep determinis-
tic policy gradient-drl enabled multiphysics-constrained fast charging
of lithium-ion battery,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics,
vol. 69, no. 3, pp. 2588–2598, 2021.
[32] S. J. Moura, F. B. Argomedo, R. Klein, A. Mirtabatabaei, and M. Krstic,
“Battery state estimation for a single particle model with electrolyte
dynamics,” IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology, vol. 25,
no. 2, pp. 453–468, 2016.
[33] H. Shi, L. Wang, S. Wang, C. Fernandez, X. Xiong, B. E. Dablu,
and W. Xu, “A novel lumped thermal characteristic modeling strategy
for the online adaptive temperature and parameter co-estimation of
vehicle lithium-ion batteries,” Journal of Energy Storage, vol. 50, Article
104309, 2022.
[34] G. Suri and S. Onori, “A control-oriented cycle-life model for hybrid
electric vehicle lithium-ion batteries,” Energy, vol. 96, pp. 644–653,
2016.
[35] Q. Ouyang, R. Fang, G. Xu, and Y. Liu, “User-involved charging control
for lithium-ion batteries with economic cost optimization,” Applied
Energy, vol. 314, p. 118878, 2022.
[36] J. Blank, K. Deb, Y. Dhebar, S. Bandaru, and H. Seada, “Generating
well-spaced points on a unit simplex for evolutionary many-objective
optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, In
press.
[37] J.-X. Pan, K.-T. Fang, J.-X. Pan, and K.-T. Fang, “Maximum likelihood
estimation,” Growth Curve Models and Statistical Diagnostics, pp. 77–
158, 2002.
[38] L. Shen, J. Li, L. Meng, L. Zhu, and H. T. Shen, “Transfer learning-
based state of charge and state of health estimation for li-ion batteries:
A review,” IEEE Transactions on Transportation Electrification, vol. 10,
no. 1, pp. 1465–1481, 2023.
[39] Q. Zhong, L. Gao, W. Li, and A. Garg, “Transfer learning based topology
optimization of battery cooling channels design for improved thermal
performance,” Applied Thermal Engineering, vol. 263, p. 125400, 2025.
[40] Y. Li, T. Wik, Y. Huang, and C. Zou, “Optimization-Free Fast Charging
for Lithium-Ion Batteries Using Model Inversion Techniques,” IFAC-
PapersOnLine, vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 6636–6641, 2023.
[41] Y. Li, D. M. Vilathgamuwa, E. Wikner, Z. Wei, X. Zhang, T. Thiringer,
T. Wik, and C. Zou, “Electrochemical model-based fast charging:
Physical constraint-triggered pi control,” IEEE Transactions on Energy
Conversion, vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 3208–3220, 2021.
[42] V. Feoktistov, Differential evolution.
Springer, 2006.
[43] J. Knowles, “Parego: A hybrid algorithm with on-line landscape ap-
proximation for expensive multiobjective optimization problems,” IEEE
Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 50–66,
2006.
[44] Z. Zhang, Y. Wang, G. Sun, and T. Pang, “A distribution information-
based kriging-assisted evolutionary algorithm for expensive many-
objective optimization problems,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary
Computation, 2024.
[45] Y. Li, W. Li, S. Li, and Y. Zhao, “An infill sampling criterion based
on improvement of probability and mapping crowding distance for
expensive multi/many-objective optimization,” Engineering Applications
of Artificial Intelligence, vol. 133, Article 108616, 2024.
[46] K. O’Regan, F. B. Planella, W. D. Widanage, and E. Kendrick,
“Thermal-electrochemical parameters of a high energy lithium-ion cylin-
drical battery,” Electrochimica Acta, vol. 425, Article 140700, 2022.
[47] M. Ecker, T. K. D. Tran, P. Dechent, S. K¨abitz, A. Warnecke, and D. U.
Sauer, “Parameterization of a physico-chemical model of a lithium-ion
battery: I. Determination of parameters,” Journal of The Electrochemical
Society, vol. 162, no. 9, pp. A1836–A1848, 2015.
